<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-1" id="chapter-1-11" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</h3>
			<p>On the third day of the <span xml:lang="es-ES">Gobernador</span>’s stay visitors of a different type came to the building in the Avenida. Archie, in a new suit of flannels, limped up the steps, and had his card sent up to the great man. While he waited, Janet appeared, in a summer costume of pale blue linen, with a cornflower-blue hat which brought out delightfully the colour of her eyes and hair. They were admitted at once, for they had evidently come by appointment. The tall porter who conducted them to the lift looked approvingly at the lady, and the three men who were lounging in the corridor outside the <span xml:lang="es-ES">Gobernador</span>’s private room made audible and appreciative comments. The three were dressed like the ordinary Olifero clerk, but they bulged a little at the hips; their names were Carreras, a Spaniard, Biretti, an Italian, and Daniel Judson, who passed as an Australian.</p>
			<p>The <span xml:lang="es-ES">Gobernador</span> seemed to welcome the Roylances’ intrusion. He had many questions to ask⁠—about their impressions of the Gran Seco, about Veiro and Don Mario, what class of polo Olifa afforded in Archie’s view, the date of their return home. His manner towards them was paternal, as to two attractive children who had strayed into a dusty office.</p>
			<p>“The heats are beginning,” he said, “and Olifa loses its pleasant visitors. The Americans have fled, I understand⁠—the noisy young people, I mean, who were in the Gran Seco when you were there.”</p>
			<p>“All but one,” said Janet. “Barbara Dasent, whom you met at Veiro, is still here. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.boat">Corinna</i> is back in the Old Harbour, and she will give us a lift to Panama.⁠ ⁠… Excellency, I am going to be very bold. We want you to come and dine with us one night before we go.”</p>
			<p>The <span xml:lang="es-ES">Gobernador</span> looked at the girl, flushed, laughing, like a child who is in doubt as to how its audacity will be taken; he looked at Archie, very cool and sunburnt; and then he looked at Janet again. He was a student of human nature, but he had never in his varied experience met such a type before. Here was beauty without egotism, one who seemed to him to look out upon life in a mood of mingled innocence, mirth, and adventure, a woman without those feminine arts which had always wearied him, but with a charm the stronger for its unconsciousness. The <span xml:lang="es-ES">Gobernador</span> did not allow himself holidays, but, like all mortals, he needed change, and Janet seemed to offer a new atmosphere.</p>
			<p>“I thank you, but, alas! I do not go into society,” he said. “There are difficulties, you see. You are at the Hotel de la Constitutión? Well, if I dined with you at the hotel, there would be something of a scene. That is not vanity on my part, Lady Roylance, but there are so many people who wish me to do things for them or to ask me questions that I cannot safely go into public places.”</p>
			<p>His face showed that he wished to accept, and Janet was emboldened.</p>
			<p>“We quite see that. Besides, the hotel is a noisy place. What we propose is that you come and dine with us on the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.boat">Corinna</i>. It will be deliciously cool on the water, and only Barbara Dasent will be there. Then we can have a proper talk, and Archie and I will sit at your feet.”</p>
			<p>The <span xml:lang="es-ES">Gobernador</span> smiled. “Your invitation is very seductive. I think I can arrange tomorrow night. I will be on the quay at the Old Harbour at half past seven⁠—the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.boat">Corinna</i>, I think, lies in the outer basin.⁠ ⁠… By the way, I have to take certain precautions⁠—the Government insist on it. There are three men who always attend me⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“That’s all right,” said Archie. “We’ll send the big launch. I say, this is topping. I only wish you were coming on with us to Panama!”</p>
			<p>The three men, Carreras, Biretti, and Judson, took their duties seriously. As soon as they heard that the <span xml:lang="es-ES">Gobernador</span> was to dine on board the American yacht, they set about preparing for emergencies. They were supreme ruffians, each with a string of murders to his credit, but they were loyal to their immediate paymaster. They arranged with the Port authorities⁠—for the <span xml:lang="es-ES">Gobernador</span>’s bodyguard had considerable purchase in Olifa and often acted without consulting their master⁠—that a harbour patrol boat should be lying adjacent to the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.boat">Corinna</i> between the hours of seven and eleven on the following night. In response to an agreed signal it should close the yacht. They also took counsel with one of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.boat">Corinna</i>’s engineers, for in their profession they left nothing to chance. This was a rough, sulky-looking fellow who spoke with a strong Glasgow accent. He must have had a past uncommon among the hands of a well-appointed yacht, for on his arrival in Olifa he had been welcomed into a life of which the authorities of that respectable capital knew little. He seemed to have ample leisure, and spent it for the most part in shadowy back streets. In small wine-shops, in rooms remote from the public eye, he drank and gambled and talked with queer customers. They were not the ordinary riffraff of the port, but some of them men of good presence and manners, with pale faces and absorbed eyes and a great gift of silence. It was a furtive company, which dispersed always one by one, and did not talk till it was certain of secrecy.</p>
			<p>Carreras, Biretti, and Judson had joined this group on their arrival, and the Scotsman had become their special intimate. To the others he was Señor Jorge, but Judson, who seemed to have known him before, called him Red Geordie. The massive set of his jaw and his sullen blue eyes seemed to have earned him respect, for, when he spoke, he was always listened to. There was some bond between him and the <span xml:lang="es-ES">Gobernador</span>’s three, for they told him of the approaching visit to the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.boat">Corinna</i> and the precautions they had taken. The consequence was that on the following morning he, too, became active. He put on his engineer’s uniform and visited the Port authorities, where he interviewed a variety of polite officials. After that he descended into the harbourside quarters, and had speech with others who were not polite. It is probable that he returned from his round of interviews a little poorer than when he started.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>The early tropic dusk had fallen when the <span xml:lang="es-ES">Gobernador</span>’s car deposited him at the quay of the Old Harbour, and from a taxi in his wake descended his three attendants. Archie Roylance was waiting on the steps, and conducted his guest to the trim launch, manned by two of the yacht’s hands and the sulky Scottish engineer. The three trusties bestowed themselves forward, and a look of intelligence passed between them and the engineer. Archie fussed about to make the <span xml:lang="es-ES">Gobernador</span> comfortable in the stern, and wrapped a rug round his knees to avert the evening chill from the water.</p>
			<p>The launch threaded its way through the shipping of the Old Harbour and came into the outer basin where the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.boat">Corinna</i> lay alone, except for a patrol boat a quarter of a mile off. In the dusk the waterfront was a half-moon of twinkling lights, while beyond them the Avenida de la Paz ran in a great double belt of radiance to the starry cone of the Ciudad Nueva. Against the mulberry sky a thin fluff of smoke stood out from the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.boat">Corinna</i>’s funnels.</p>
			<p>“Getting up steam, sir,” Archie observed. “We’ve said goodbye to Olifa and we start in the small hours. A place always looks its jolliest when you are leaving it.”</p>
			<p>The dining-room of the yacht was already cool with the land breeze drifting through its open portholes. The little table, bright with linen and glass and silver, was only large enough for the party of four. The <span xml:lang="es-ES">Gobernador</span>, sitting between Janet and Barbara Dasent, was in good spirits, and looked appreciatively at the soft harmony of colours. Some sunset gleam had caught the water and the reflection of it brought a delicate glow into the room. Even Barbara’s paleness was rosy.</p>
			<p>They talked of many things⁠—of Europe, of politics, of books, of the future of mankind (these were some chaotic speculations of Archie, who seemed to be nervous and had the air of a lower boy breakfasting with the headmaster), of England a little, and much of America. The <span xml:lang="es-ES">Gobernador</span> was the soul of courtesy, and was accustomed to respect the prejudices of others. But Barbara was in a mood of candour about her countrymen and she occasionally forced him into a polite agreement. Something had happened to Barbara, for she talked fast and brilliantly, and her eyes had an unaccustomed vivacity.</p>
			<p>“We are overrun with silly women,” she said. “The United States is a woman’s country, Excellency, and we let them paint the picture which we show to the world. I do not think it is an attractive picture⁠—a mixture of shallow <i xml:lang="de">schwärmerei</i> and comfortless luxury⁠—a life of plumbing, and dentistry, and bifocal glasses, and facial and mental uplift, and snobbery about mushroom families, and a hard, brittle sweetness stuck on with pins. No wonder you do not like us!”</p>
			<p>“I did not say that, Miss Dasent. I am not sure that I assent to any of your complaints, except the <i xml:lang="de">schwärmerei</i>; and that I think is not confined to your ladies.”</p>
			<p>“I was making a catalogue of the details of the picture we present to the world. It is an ugly picture, and I know you hate it. So do I.⁠ ⁠… All the same it is a false picture, for we are the worst publicity agents on earth. The trouble is that we have had no second Columbus. Nobody from outside has ever discovered the true America.”</p>
			<p>The <span xml:lang="es-ES">Gobernador</span> dissented.</p>
			<p>“You are hard on yourselves. If I want acrid criticism of the United States, I pick up an American novel. Or I take the saying of one of your own Presidents that the modern American millionaire has usually a daughter who is a foreign princess and a son who is in a lunatic asylum. I do not take that sort of thing at its face value. You are a great people which has not yet found itself.”</p>
			<p>“You do not like us.”</p>
			<p>“As a student of humanity I am deeply interested in you.”</p>
			<p>“You are tolerant, because you do not like America. I am intolerant because I love it.”</p>
			<p>The <span xml:lang="es-ES">Gobernador</span> raised his glass and bowed. “A very honourable confession of faith. If all her daughters were like you, Miss Dasent, it would be right that America should remain a woman’s country.”</p>
			<p>The talk drifted to lighter matters⁠—to music which Barbara and the <span xml:lang="es-ES">Gobernador</span> discussed with a technical profundity appalling to Archie; to a German novel which had set the world talking; to European personalities in art and politics. Presently they left the dining-room, and ascended to a shelter on the upper deck from which the harbour was seen like a gulf of blackness rimmed by fiery particles. The <span xml:lang="es-ES">Gobernador</span>, who noticed everything, observed that the patrol boat was no longer there and that the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.boat">Corinna</i> swam alone in an inky solitude. He saw no signs of his bodyguard; no doubt, he decided, they were ensconced in the shadows beyond, where the lifeboats swung from their davits.</p>
			<p>But the three trusties were not there. They had spent a turbulent evening, and were now in a less comfortable state than their master. They had insisted on having their meal in close proximity to the dining-room, and the surly Scotch engineer had shared it with them. Between them these convivial souls had consumed a good deal of liquor, which appeared to go rapidly to the heads of the visitors. The engineer had then proposed an adjournment to his own quarters for further refreshment, and had shepherded them down a narrow alleyway, he himself going last. There was a heavy iron door, and as each of the three passed through it, on the other side he was caught round the middle by powerful arms which prevented him getting at his hip-pocket. Other hands swiftly gagged him, and still others removed his gun. The thing was done in almost complete silence. Only one of the three managed to put up a fight, and he was promptly laid low by a terrific uppercut from a seaman who had once been known as Battling Hubby, the pride of Jersey City. In something under three minutes the three heroes were gagged and trussed, and reposing, in a somewhat unreposeful state of mind, on a pile of awnings.</p>
			<p>“That’s a tidy bit of work, Geordie,” the pugilistic seaman observed to the morose engineer, and the answer was, “I’ve seen waur.”</p>
			<p>Then the engineer did a curious thing. He went aft, and with a lantern signalled to the patrol boat which lay a quarter of a mile off. The signal was observed, and presently the boat moved quietly away, leaving the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.boat">Corinna</i> solitary in the outer basin.</p>
			<p>Coffee was served to the party on the upper deck, and the guest filled his ancient briar. The steward, as he left, gave a message to Archie: “Hamilton’s compliments, sir, and the men has finished the job forward”⁠—at which Archie nodded. He was sitting in an alcove, with a small electric bell behind his arm. The <span xml:lang="es-ES">Gobernador</span> sat in a wicker chair, with a lamp on his left side, so that, by the configuration of the deck, his splendid head was silhouetted against the opaque velvet of the harbour waters. Janet and Barbara on lower chairs were sitting literally at his feet.</p>
			<p>The guest seemed to have fallen under the spell of the night which was drawing round them as close as a mantle. The shore lights did not speak of human habitation; rather they seemed as remote as a star, an extension of the infinite stellar system which faintly patterned the darkness. The stillness, the brooding canopy of the night, silenced the others, but with the <span xml:lang="es-ES">Gobernador</span> it acted as a stimulus to talk. He seemed to sit above them like an impersonal mind, his profile growing clearer as the light went out of the background of the sea.</p>
			<p>“You are a soldier?” he asked Archie.</p>
			<p>“I was. Keen, but undistinguished. The Air Force wasn’t a place for high strategy. But I’ve always lived among soldiers and heard their chat.”</p>
			<p>“It has been a great profession, but it is closed now, Sir Archibald. Science has reduced war to an everlasting stalemate. It was always on the edge of stalemate. Consider how few moves any general had to his hand. He could break a line or he could outflank it, and he could do either only by superior force or by surprise. But science has now created a norm of weapon and munitionment, which is substantially the same for all armies. It has eliminated the human factor of superiority both in general and troops. It has established, too, a norm of intelligence which makes surprise impossible. Therefore there is no room today for a military Napoleon. The Napoleon of the future must win by other methods than war. Do you agree?”</p>
			<p>“No,” said Archie; “I respectfully disagree. I can’t argue properly, but I know what I think. First, I don’t believe you can ever get rid of the human factor. Science has to be applied by mortal men, and the efficiency of its application will depend upon those who use it. You can never create what you call a norm either of character or of brains. Second, I agree that the old rules of war are a back number. A modern army can conquer savages, but in the old style of warfare it can’t conquer another modern army. But I believe that one modern nation can still conquer another. You need a wider definition of war, sir. It’s far more than marching and countermarching, and frontal and flank attacks, and number of men and weight of guns and speed of transport. It’s the effort of one people to smash the morale of another, and there are a thousand ways of doing that.”</p>
			<p>“I assent. But not in the field.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, in the field. We’ve been frozen into convention for two thousand years. The autumn of 1918 saw the end of that regime. Now mankind is going to discover new ways of exercising superiority⁠—in the field, but not by the old field tactics. Conquest is always a spiritual conquest, and means will be found for making spirit act directly on spirit.”</p>
			<p>“You are quoting. Whom?” The voice from above had a sudden interest.</p>
			<p>“A friend of mine who thinks a lot about these things. You wouldn’t know him.”</p>
			<p>“I differ from him absolutely. You are still clinging to the old notion of something incalculable and mystic which can defeat reason. You are wrong, for reason is the only power. Every day we are rationalising life, and what we cannot rationalise we can isolate and nullify. You young people are relics of the Middle Ages.”</p>
			<p>“But so is human nature.” It was Barbara who spoke.</p>
			<p>“Do not misunderstand me. We allow for the spasmodic impulses of human nature. But we analyse them and evaluate them, and by understanding them we can use them. Liberty, for example. That ancient instinct can be worked out to four places of decimals, and can consequently be used by reason. Is the human intelligence to submit docilely to be governed and thwarted by blind reactions which mankind shares with the brutes?”</p>
			<p>“You are very clever, Excellency, but I think that there is always an unknown <i epub:type="z3998:grapheme">x</i> which will defeat you. You are too clever, for you would make science and reason rule over a dimension to which they don’t apply. Humility may be more scientific than arrogance.”</p>
			<p>The guest laughed pleasantly. “I think you also are quoting. Whom, may I ask?”</p>
			<p>“A friend. Sir Archie’s friend.”</p>
			<p>Had anyone been observing Archie closely, he would have noticed that he had looked at his watch, and then made a movement towards the electric button behind his elbow. The act seemed to afford him some satisfaction, for he gave a sigh of relief and lit a cigarette.</p>
			<p>The <span xml:lang="es-ES">Gobernador</span> had turned to catch Barbara’s reply.</p>
			<p>“I should like to meet your friend,” he said, and then suddenly he flung his head back and listened. The throb of the propeller was felt through the vessel, and the ear caught the swish of moving water.</p>
			<p>“You will soon have that pleasure,” said Barbara, “for we are taking you to him.”</p>
			<p>In an instant the guest was on his feet. “What nonsense is this?” he asked sharply. His tall figure towered menacingly above the others, who remained seated in their chairs.</p>
			<p>“It is all right, sir,” said Archie. A change had come over the young man, for the diffidence, the lower-boy shyness, which had been noticeable all the evening, had gone. Now he seemed to be at his ease and to be enjoying himself. “I know it is a bit of a liberty, and we apologise and all that sort of thing, but it had to be done. You see, we greatly admire you and we want you to be our leader.⁠ ⁠… It is no use shouting for your bodyguard. I’m afraid we had to handle them a little roughly, and at this moment they are trussed up and adrift in a boat. The tide’s all right and they’ll be picked up tomorrow morning in the harbour.⁠ ⁠… Please don’t do anything rash, sir. Our men are all about, and they carry guns. You see, we really mean business.”</p>
			<p>The <span xml:lang="es-ES">Gobernador</span> had his face averted so the other three could not see his change of mood. But a change there was, for he flung himself down in his chair and refilled his pipe.</p>
			<p>“I’m a busy man,” he said, “and you are doing more harm than you can realise. Also I am afraid you are making serious trouble for yourselves. But I suppose I must submit to this prank. I was right when I said you were still in the Middle Ages. You are a set of melodramatic children.⁠ ⁠… I hope you don’t mean it to last long. By the way, where are you taking me?”</p>
			<p>Janet clapped her hands. “I have won my bet. I knew you would take it well. I told you when we asked you to dinner that we were going to sit at your feet. That is true, you know. We want you to lead us.”</p>
			<p>“We are going to help you to discover America,” said Barbara. “You will be our new Columbus.”</p>
			<p>“You will meet the friend,” said Archie, “whom Miss Dasent and I have been quoting.”</p>
			<p>“Perhaps you will now tell me his name,” said the <span xml:lang="es-ES">Gobernador</span>.</p>
			<p>“We call him Sandy,” Archie said casually. “His name used to be Arbuthnot. Now it’s Clanroyden.”</p>
			<p>The recovered urbanity of the <span xml:lang="es-ES">Gobernador</span> was suddenly broken. A cry escaped him, and he turned his face away to the racing seas, but not before Janet had seen his brows knit in a mood so dark that she unconsciously reached for Archie’s hand.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
