<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-2" id="chapter-2-13" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</h3>
			<p>Janet woke with a start from her uneasy sleep. Her nights had been troubled of late, and she was accustomed to waking with a start.</p>
			<p>The darkness was very thick and close around her, but it was not the closeness of a narrow room. There was a free draught of air and a sense of space, which suggested that she was under the bare vault of heaven. And yet the faint odour was not of the natural world, but of man’s handiwork⁠—hewn stone, and the dust of hewn stone, the smell of a place roofed and enclosed.</p>
			<p>She lit the candle beside her mattress. It scarcely flickered when she lit it, though there was a sound of wind high up in the dark above her. She told herself that here she was safe, safe at any rate till the morning. Every night she came here, and the narrow entrance was blocked by a pile of cut stones which fitted as closely as a door. When she was first introduced to these sleeping-quarters she had been in a terror of loneliness and anticipation. And then she had realised that this was a merciful provision, that she had at any rate the hours of night to herself, and that not till the sun rose again and the blocks were removed would she have to face the true burden of captivity. Here in this vast dark place, like the inside of a mountain, she was for the moment free.</p>
			<p>She tried to compose herself to sleep again, for she knew that she needed all her physical and nervous strength for the strain of a new day. But she could not stop her mind from racing. She counted the days she had been a prisoner⁠—seven days, an inconsiderable week, which would have passed too soon in her normal happy life. Now in the retrospect it seemed to lengthen into an eternity. It was only by an effort that she could recall the details of her first coming⁠—the dizzy journey half in the clouds; the Gran Seco like a cup below her brimming with the morning sunlight; the serpentine course among the valleys of the high hills; the blue lake on which the seaplane had alighted; the march with her pilot in the tangled glens through a long day of heat and misery, among strange birds and insects and creepers like the clutching fingers of ghosts; the meeting with a patrol of his allies⁠—the exquisite Pasquali, a man named Molinoff, and four strange Indians with red ponchos; the coming at last into a valley full of stones built in a circle around a huge rotunda. The jungle had not penetrated one inch into this dead city, for the lush vegetation stopped as if edged by a gardener, and the silent avenues were floored with fine white dust, and the walls were so polished and impenetrable that there was no crevice for a blade of grass. Here she had found bivouac fires and evil faces, faces which to her tired eyes were like the demons of a nightmare. They had given her food, and had been civil enough. D’Ingraville’s manners during that awful day had been punctilious, and the men who received her had shown a cold and level politeness. They meant no ill to her⁠—at least for the moment; their careful provision for her safety was proof of it; and when after some fluttering hours in the darkness of the first night she understood this, she had a momentary access of courage.</p>
			<p>The following day she had realised her position more fully. She was a hostage, to be protected as such, a card when the time arrived to be ruthlessly played. She was given an Indian servant, who brought her water and towels, and her meals when she chose to feed alone. Otherwise she was welcome to sit with her captors, at least with one section of them. For she soon discovered that there were two groups in the camp. One was composed of men of the D’Ingraville type, who in dress and speech and manners were gentlemen. These she realised were the Conquistadors, of whom she had heard so much, and even in her loneliness and fear she could not repress her interest in them.⁠ ⁠… Some of the names she had known before. There was Lariarty, who had been at school with Sandy, and Larbert, whom she believed she had danced with at a Perth ball, and who had once been engaged to a distant cousin. Romanes, too, Cyril Romanes⁠—she had known his name as a noted figure in the hunting-field and a polo-player of worldwide fame. The other names were new to her, Calvo, and Suvorin, and Pasquali, and Seminov, and Laringetti, and Duclos-Mazarin, and Glorian. They were of every physical type⁠—D’Ingraville slim and fair with a pointed beard and a faun-like head; Suvorin, tall, bony, with a skin like old parchment, and hair as light as an albino; Calvo, short and fat; Pasquali, dark, elegant, and hook-nosed; Lariarty with full, well-cut features and a fine brow; Larbert built on the scale of an athlete; Romanes with his neat light-cavalry figure. But all had something in common⁠—the pallor of their faces, their small, considered gestures, and the opaqueness of their eyes.</p>
			<p>The other group was of different clay. They were of the type of the four who had carried her off, men whose character showed brazenly in their faces. They fed apart from the Conquistadors, and, though they took their general orders from them, lived very much their own life. They gambled and quarrelled and occasionally fought, but since they had no liquor they were reasonably well behaved. They went off in twos and threes to hunt and prospect, and they always reported on their return to Romanes, who seemed to be in charge of the camp. There was little comfort to be had from looking at their faces, on which life had written too plainly its tale. But at any rate they could laugh. Sometimes into the frozen urbanity of the Conquistadors’ talk the distant sound of their guffaws came like an echo of life in a world of the dead.</p>
			<p>She had to keep a tight hold on her nerves to prevent a breakdown, when she sat among her strange companions. Sandy had called the Gran Seco a “port of missing ships,” and these ships seemed to be phantoms, green with the weeds of some unholy sea. They were mechanically polite, rising when she entered and bowing like automata, helping her first to the monotonous fare; but their words to her were like the commonplaces of a French conversation book. She made many efforts to talk⁠—of music to Pasquali, of hunting to Romanes, of home and friends to Larbert and Lariarty, but she found a wall of opaque civility. Those pages were shut for them, and would not be reopened. She realised that the memories of these men were drugged and their emotions atrophied. But not their minds. Very soon she understood that their minds were furiously alive.</p>
			<p>For, after the first day or two, while they did not talk to her they talked among themselves before her. There was no danger to be feared from her, for she was securely in their power. They spoke as sparingly as they ate, but bit by bit she gathered the import of their talk. They were desperately anxious about something, and presently it was clear to her that this something was Castor. He was the one anchor of these missing ships. Without him there was no safety in any port.⁠ ⁠… The girl, as she watched, grew amazed and awed at the extent of Castor’s power. He had plucked these derelicts out of the storm, and bestowed on them a dreadful simulacrum of peace. His drug had blotted out the past and given them a keen intellectual life in the present. Without him they were lost again, and all the power of their minds was devoted to winning him back.⁠ ⁠… Soon, from small pieces of evidence, she realised that the same thing was true of the ruffians of the Bodyguard. They, too, were loyal to their salt. The Gobernador had cast his spell over them, and they were resolved to return to his service. Both parties knew what the world did not know, that the Gobernador had been carried off, and was an unwilling figurehead of the rebellion. For Olifa they cared nothing at all, but they were determined that Castor should be set free, and the Castor regime restored.</p>
			<p>On his account she was a hostage. She saw that they realised that Lossberg might win in the field, but that, even if the rebels were broken up and driven in commandos to the mountains, Castor might be carried with them. To retrieve him she was their chief instrument, their asset to bargain with. If bargaining was impossible, she knew that she need expect no mercy, for pity did not dwell among Conquistadors or Bodyguard.⁠ ⁠… Castor must be recovered, but it was also necessary that Lossberg should win, for if the rebellion succeeded there would be no hope of the restoration of the old life of the Gran Seco, and it was to this that they clung.</p>
			<p>Janet gathered that they were satisfied with Lossberg’s progress. She had heard Magee, who had arrived the day before her, exulting over the news he brought. But she gathered also that the Conquistadors were anxious. On the day after her coming the four men who had carried her off, Dan Judson, Laschallas, Radin, and Trompetter, appeared in the camp. They had come by the seaplane, and apparently damaged it, for D’Ingraville cursed them with a cold bitterness. But others were expected, with messages from Lossberg, messages which must be brought by air, seeing that Sandy’s patrols lay between the two camps.⁠ ⁠… These messages did not come. No planes of any kind broke through the cordon and brought news. It was clear that the Conquistadors believed that the messengers had started, and had been shot down, and that their chief preoccupation was to establish communications again.</p>
			<p>Suddenly their anxiety seemed to acquire a sharper edge. Molinoff, Carreras, and Carvilho were out daily, but not as hunters, and every night they returned, bone-weary men. Janet, who had already taken her bearings by the sun, had some rough idea of the position of the camp. She knew nothing about the direction of the País de Venenos, but she realised that she must be in the Cordilleras, in a loop of the main chain, where it split into lateral valleys, and that due west of her lay the Gran Seco and her friends. She noticed that the three men in their daily excursions always went south, as if they were looking for something. One night they did not return, and the following afternoon they staggered in drunken with weariness. But they had discovered something of importance, for Molinoff before he tasted food or drink sought out Romanes.</p>
			<p>What the discovery was Janet could not learn, but at supper that evening her hosts seemed to be shaken out of their frozen composure. They talked⁠—for them⁠—rapidly, and in low tones. Occasionally one of them would look towards her to see if she was listening, and once Romanes seemed to be about to address her, but changed his mind. She pretended absorption in her food, but her ears were open and she caught one thing. They were determined to send a message to someone. That someone could only be Lossberg. They had learned that which might be vital to his success.</p>
			<p>For the first time Janet was diverted from anxiety about herself and about Archie’s peace of mind. She saw dimly a chance for action. She could not escape, but could she not find out their secret⁠—hamper them in some way⁠—do something to relieve the dreadful tedium of her impotence? She lay awake half the night making futile plans.</p>
			<p>Next day she had awoke with a new purpose in life. She observed one result of the previous evening’s discussion. The Indians in the camp were summoned to a council. These were Indians such as she had never seen before⁠—tall men, incredibly lean, with faces like skulls and luminous, feverish eyes. One of them seemed to be chosen for a mission, for he was given a letter by Romanes which he secreted on his body, and the next Janet saw was his red poncho disappearing into the forest.⁠ ⁠… He was not the only messenger. Magee, a wiry little ruffian who knew the Indian speech and acted as interpreter, was also entrusted with a message. To him no letter was given, but Romanes spoke to him long and carefully, drawing plans till he nodded his comprehension. Just before midday Magee also disappeared into the forest which clad the slopes to the westward.</p>
			<p>There was a change in the manner of the Conquistadors. The necessity for haste seemed to have stripped off some of their civilised veneer. Before they had treated her with complete apathy; now she saw in their eyes suspicion, it might be malevolence. Oddly enough, it made her less afraid. She took it as good news. They had learned something which meant advantage to her friends, or they would not be so eager to forewarn the other side. Janet grew almost at her ease. And then she saw that in D’Ingraville’s face which sent a shiver down her spine. The success of her own side meant that she would become valueless as a hostage. But she would remain a prisoner⁠—and a victim.</p>
			<p>Next day she had felt the same atmosphere around her of cruelty, gloating cruelty. Before she had been lonely, anxious, oppressed, but now she knew the real chill of fear. Whither could she turn? The Indians? They were savages out of some other world, and she had not a word of their speech. There was no pity in their gaunt, glowing faces.⁠ ⁠… The Bodyguard? They at any rate were human, for they could laugh. One of them, too, had a dog, a mongrel terrier, with whom Janet, having an invincible attraction for all dogs, had endeavoured to make friends. She had partly succeeded, but success was easier with one kind of animal than with the other. The Bodyguard that day was dispersed, except the three, Molinoff, Carvilho, and Carreras, who were resting after their labours of the previous days. Carreras had been one of the three trusties who had been hardly treated by Geordie Hamilton that evening on board the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.boat">Corinna</i>, and, since he had seen her there, he seemed to regard her with special rancour. As she passed them, where they grumbled and spat over a game of cards, she felt that among these squalid ruffians there was no refuge from the cruelty of their masters.</p>
			<p>With no books, and nothing to occupy her thoughts, she had watched the hot afternoon decline to evening. She saw homing birds returning, especially one great eagle which had been hunting out in the plains. She saw the sun go down behind the hills, and kindle far off a blue peak which reminded her of Stob Dearg as seen from her room at Glenraden. The old happy world she had lost flitted through her mind in a chain of pictures which she had not the strength to repel. She shut her eyes tight, and the smell of wood smoke from the cooking-fires brought back the hall at Glenraden in wintertime, with her sister Agatha making tea, and her father stamping the snow from his feet, and the dogs tangled on the hearthstone.⁠ ⁠… But it was the picture of Archie which broke her heart, the picture which she had so resolutely fought to shut from her; Archie with his boyish laugh and tousled hair and flushed face, so absurd and unexpected and gallant and gentle.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>Janet had her supper alone in the immense rotunda where she slept. The Indian who brought it looked steadily before him and had no language but a grave inclination of the head. She heard the blocks being piled together, and knew that for another night she was safe. She blew out her candle and tried to sleep, but now it was not fear that thrilled her, but homesickness. She had gone clean over the horizon, away from the kindly race of men. She believed that she could face horrors, death if necessary, if only a friendly eye or voice were near, if only Archie could hold her hand.⁠ ⁠… But if Archie were here it would mean death for him. The thought terrified her till she remembered how vain it was. Archie would be looking for her with a breaking heart, but by no conceivable chance could he find her hiding-place. It was like being buried deep in the earth.⁠ ⁠… Archie was safe. That was something.⁠ ⁠… As for herself, whether Sandy lost or won she would not live to see it. A sense of utter hopelessness had come over her, the shadow of a dark and certain destiny. But in this certainty there was a kind of miserable peace, and she fell asleep.</p>
			<p>She awoke with a start, lit her candle and watched the monstrous shadows run into the uppermost gloom. Then, as we have seen, she tried to sleep again, and slowly drifted from memory to vagueness, from vagueness to unconsciousness.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>She woke again, this time to complete awareness. She had heard a sound different from the light rumble of the wind or the fall of minute particles of dust. There was a human presence somewhere in the emptiness.</p>
			<p>Panic shook her. Her sanctuary was no sanctuary, and her enemies were here. With trembling fingers she struck a match and held it to her candle. It seemed ages before the wick caught fire, and then it flickered thinly. She was on her feet now, her eyes wildly searching the darkness.</p>
			<p>Suddenly a voice spoke from behind her.</p>
			<p>“Please do not be alarmed, Lady Roylance. I am sorry to have disturbed you.”</p>
			<p>It was a pleasant voice⁠—a foreign voice, for it spoke English with unnatural precision, and made three syllables of her surname. There was something reassuring about that precision. It seemed familiar, too.</p>
			<p>“Who is it?” she asked, her voice still quivering.</p>
			<p>A figure came out of the gloom. She held up the candle and it revealed an Indian, barelegged and barefooted, wearing a long tunic of cats’ skins and on his shoulder a red poncho. In her amazement she almost dropped the candle and all her terrors returned.</p>
			<p>He seemed to understand her fright, for he spoke rapidly.</p>
			<p>“Please do not fear. I am a friend whom you know. I am a friend of your husband and of Lord Clanroyden.⁠ ⁠… Will you please dress a little, for I would like you to take a walk with me. I will retire. We cannot speak in this place.”</p>
			<p>“But who are you?” This time her voice had hope.</p>
			<p>“My name is Luis de Marzaniga.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, Don Luis, Don Luis!”⁠ ⁠… Her voice was a wail, for violent relief often takes the tone of tragedy. “Oh, my dear, my dear⁠ ⁠… I am so glad.⁠ ⁠… I can’t speak.⁠ ⁠… In a second I will be ready.”</p>
			<p>Janet’s toilet did not take long, for she had no clothes but those in which she had left the Courts of the Morning. She pulled on a jumper, and thrust her feet into a pair of much-stained grey suède shoes. At her call Luis again came out of the darkness.</p>
			<p>“I know I’m a fright, Don Luis. My hair won’t stay tidy, for I have lost most of my hairpins. I swear I shall be shingled as soon as I get home.⁠ ⁠… Archie wanted me to, before we came out here.⁠ ⁠… Have you any word of Archie?⁠ ⁠… We can’t get out of this place, you know.” She babbled like a happy child.</p>
			<p>“No,” he said, “but we can get above it. You have a good head, I hope, Lady Roylance, for I am going to take you nearer to the stars.”</p>
			<p>He led her to the southeastern corner, and there her candle, which he carried, revealed a low recess. He motioned her to follow him and she found herself in a tunnel where she had to crouch, almost to crawl. He felt carefully the left side and suddenly he stopped and reached for her hand. “Follow close,” he whispered. “The tunnel is a trap, which ends presently in a pit.”</p>
			<p>They squeezed through a subsidiary opening, and almost at once found the roof rise. “There is a staircase,” he whispered. “It is built inside the wall, but it is in good condition. You can stand upright now.” He blew out the candle and took her hand.</p>
			<p>The steps were smooth and unbroken and they rose steeply. Then they seemed to turn a corner, where the darkness was exchanged for a faint green light. With every step the light grew, and the smell of earth and powdered stone began to change to the freshness of the outer world. Suddenly wind blew in their faces, and they emerged on a kind of barbican, with the stone slats of a roof rising steeply behind them, and in front, beyond a low parapet, the valley white in the moonshine.</p>
			<p>Janet caught her breath. The sight was not only of a torturing beauty, but it seemed to be an earnest of freedom. She peered over the edge and saw far below her the dusty avenues of the camp, white and quiet as if under a mantle of snow. One of the cooking-fires still smoked feebly, but otherwise there was no movement in the place. The subsidiary towers, which recalled in their shape pictures she had seen of the Rhodesian Zimbabwes, were like solid cones of pale ivory, and their shadows were deep emerald. The valley, she saw, was thickly forested on all sides, the trees now milky in the moon, now of the blackest jet. But beyond its containing walls she saw what was invisible to one below, peaks which must be high mountains, but which under this vault of elfin light seemed curiously near and foreshortened. To the west and southwest, apart from the barrier ridge, the horizon seemed empty, and she realised that she was very near to the edge of the hills. Over there must lie the Gran Seco and her friends.</p>
			<p>The girl drew long breaths of an air which seemed to blend the aromatic strangeness of forests with the coolness of the high snows. She felt in command once again of herself and her fate. Below were her captors, but now she stood above them.</p>
			<p>“What is this place?” she asked.</p>
			<p>He spoke a name.</p>
			<p>“The Thrones of the Kings,” she repeated.</p>
			<p>“Of the King,” he corrected. “Los Tronos del Rey. There was only one king, but he was very great. When he died, his captains and councillors were made to die with him. He was buried here, and they in those lesser towers. Once each was also full of gold and silver images and uncountable treasure, but they were rifled long ago by the ancestors of our people⁠—my own among them. The spoilers would have destroyed the tombs also, but they could not. No hand of man can touch this masonry. High explosives only, and happily they did not have them.”</p>
			<p>“Does the world know about it?”</p>
			<p>He shook his head, “Only the Indians of the País de Venenos, and they do not talk. The other Indians of the hills regard it as accursed and will not approach it.”</p>
			<p>“But who brought these people here⁠—the Conquistadors and the others?”</p>
			<p>“The man called Romanes was in touch with the País de Venenos⁠—also, I think, Pasquali. They got their drugs there, and it was necessary for them to find a camp near. I sanctioned it, for I have much power among the people of the Poison Valley. It was by my authority that these Indians accompanied them, and I myself joined them. You admire my disguise? Since their first coming here I also have been present to observe.⁠ ⁠… But I did not expect you, Lady Roylance, and you have given me anxious thoughts.⁠ ⁠… Also there is another development. Romanes, he who is the commandante, is a good soldier, and his mind is quick. He has discovered that which I hoped to keep hidden.”</p>
			<p>“I know,” said Janet excitedly. “I saw yesterday that they had found out something which they thought desperately important. I tried to discover what it was⁠—but of course I had no chance. They have sent off messengers to General Lossberg.”</p>
			<p>“They have. But I do not think those messengers will get through. One was an Indian, and he is already back with me in the forest, not a mile away. The other was the man called Magee. I think that by this time he may have had an accident.”</p>
			<p>“What was the news?”</p>
			<p>“No less than the secret way out of the Gran Seco, the way by which I am accustomed to travel. Olifa believes that there is no road but the railway, except for a stray cragsman. The Gobernador also believes this. But there is a way through difficult passes into the Vulpas valley. Once I showed it to Lord Clanroyden, and it is a road which a light army can travel.”</p>
			<p>“I see, I see,” Janet cried. “Then Sandy might use it, unless Lossberg gets there before him.”</p>
			<p>“Lossberg will not get there before him. And Lord Clanroyden will beyond doubt use it, since it is the only path to victory.”</p>
			<p>Janet clasped her hands. All fear for herself had gone, and she joyfully felt herself already united with her friends, since she was again in the game. “I thought I was hidden hundreds of miles away from the rest,” she said, “and I find that I am at the key-point.”</p>
			<p>Luis looked down upon the small figure whose hair was dull gold in the moonlight, and he smiled.</p>
			<p>“But you cannot stay here,” he said. “It is too dangerous. It is very necessary that you escape not later than tomorrow night⁠—tonight, I mean, for it is now past midnight.”</p>
			<p>“I long to get away.⁠ ⁠… I admit I have been horribly frightened.⁠ ⁠… But is there nothing I could do if I stayed?”</p>
			<p>“You are brave. But no, there is nothing you can do. You will understand that these people are now in a dangerous mood. You are their hostage, but any day they may think that you can be of no use as a hostage, and then⁠ ⁠… they will not be merciful. They are very complete rascals, and it is necessary to keep them here till Lord Clanroyden has made his great stroke. That I think I can undertake through my friends. But we cannot have one of our own people left in their hands. They will be helpless, like imprisoned starving dogs, but they have nasty fangs.⁠ ⁠… No, you must go tomorrow night⁠—this night.”</p>
			<p>“Will you come with me?”</p>
			<p>“No. I will follow you by another road. But I will see that you are accompanied. It is a journey which will need courage, Lady Roylance. Also tomorrow will need courage. Your warders will be in a difficult temper, and you must act a part. You must appear to be in deep sorrow, and I think you had better be a little ill. Yet you must go among them, for when they see you sad and helpless they will be encouraged and perhaps hopeful, and it is very necessary to keep their hope alive for another day. If they have hope they will not think yet of revenge.⁠ ⁠… You will sup in your big bedroom, as you did tonight, and an hour before moonrise I will come for you.”</p>
			<p>“But how can you get out of this place?”</p>
			<p>“By the way which I shall use tonight. The old builders had many tunnels and passages, which I and my Indians have long known. That is simple. It will be harder to get out of the valley, but there is a road for bold hearts, and after a little your friends will meet you. That I have arranged.⁠ ⁠… And now you must go back to bed and sleep very well, for you have much to do tomorrow.”</p>
			<p>“I shall sleep,” Janet cried. “I do not think that I have really slept since I came here, but now⁠ ⁠…” Her face glowed with happiness; she seized his hands and held them, like a child who finds in a gesture what it cannot find in words.</p>
			<p>“You have not asked me who will be your escort,” he said.</p>
			<p>“I feel so strong,” she laughed, “that if you gave me the right direction I think I could escape alone.”</p>
			<p>“Not so, my dear lady. It is too hard a task for one, even one so gallant. But you will be given full directions, and two trusty companions. One will be a Scotch soldier, whose name is Hamilton.”</p>
			<p>Janet dropped his hands and stared open-mouthed.</p>
			<p>“Geordie Hamilton! Fusilier Geordie! How on earth did he get here? He was in the garrison in the Courts of the Morning.”</p>
			<p>“He is here. He arrived, having fallen sick on the way, but he is now cured. The other⁠ ⁠…” He paused.</p>
			<p>“The other?” Janet repeated, with a sudden wild anticipation.</p>
			<p>“The other is your husband.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
