<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-1" id="chapter-1-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h3>
			<p>On their return to the city they were met by an incensed Don Alejandro. Not only had the permits for the Gran Seco not arrived, they had been definitely refused. It was not the work of the Government⁠—this he had ascertained from his second cousin, the Minister for External Affairs. The refusal came from the Company itself, and Don Alejandro was positive that it was due to the interference of the American Consul. No doubt Wilbur had meant well, but apparently he had pressed the request so that the Company had assumed that he was its principal sponsor, and had naturally refused, since they thought they had done enough for his unpopular country by permitting the entrance of the party from the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.boat">Corinna</i>. There was no doubt about it. Don Alejandro had heard from a friend who was deep in the Company’s affairs that Wilbur was the cause of the refusal.</p>
			<p>To Janet’s surprise Archie seemed rather relieved than otherwise. “Just as well, perhaps,” he said. “We should probably have got fever or something, and we didn’t come six thousand miles to look at a mining district. We have plenty of them at home.”</p>
			<p>He had not told Janet of Don Luis’s warning, but he had brooded over it, and with his separation from the giver its good sense seemed to grow more convincing. Why on earth should Janet and he waste time in visiting a dusty plateau, even though it was the source of Olifa’s prosperity and might have importance in Olifa’s future politics? He would learn little in a hurried tour, and it wasn’t his line to pick up gossip and go home and raise a racket in Parliament about Gran Seco atrocities.⁠ ⁠… They would go south to Cardanio and Alcorta, and might make a short trip into the mountains. The Twelve Apostles would bear inspection from closer quarters.⁠ ⁠… After that they would go home by Panama, and perhaps visit Jamaica. His mother’s family had once owned big plantations there, established by an ancestor who had left the country hurriedly after Culloden.</p>
			<p>So they fell back upon Olifa society, and Archie played polo daily at the club, and they gave a dinner at the hotel; and were just preparing to set out for Cardanio, when they were bidden to luncheon by no less a person than the President. A superb card of invitation, surmounted by the Olifa arms in gold, gave Archie the title of “Right Honourable,” and designed Janet as the “Honourable Lady <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Roylance.” Archie consulted Don Alejandro as to his garments, and was informed that the manners of Olifa were English and that they might both wear what they pleased. So Janet and he appeared at the President’s mansion in their ordinary clothes, to find most of the men in evening dress with ribbons and stars, and all the women in Paris hats and what looked like wedding gowns. Janet promptly had a fit of giggles, and it was a flushed and embarrassed pair who made their bow to the heavy, sallow, bull-necked <i xml:lang="es">Excelentísimo</i>.</p>
			<p>The day was hot, the place where they sat was as heavily upholstered as a Victorian dining-room, and the conversation had the languor of a ceremonial banquet. Janet, as the guest of honour, sat on the President’s right hand, while Archie at the other end was sandwiched between a voluminous elderly woman who was the President’s wife and a sleepy Frenchwoman whose husband was Don Alejandro’s kinsman. His head had been confused by many introductions, but he had made out that kinsman, a Sanfuentes of the younger branch, and a tall man with a forked beard who was Aribia, the Minister of Finance. There was a vacant chair on Janet’s right side.</p>
			<p>The meal seemed interminable. The food was pretentiously good, and the guests seemed to have been starved for days, for they refused none of the dishes. Sweet champagne was served, and the Olifa Tokay, but when Archie, greatly daring, asked for a whisky-and-soda, it was brought him, and to his surprise was prewar whisky. There seemed to be about twenty footmen, all in knee-breeches, mestizos who in their gaudy liveries had an air of comic opera. Archie tried his bad Spanish on his two ladies, and, having exhausted the beauties and greatness of Olifa, the distress of Europe, their families, and his visit to Veiro, was hard put to it for topics. Señora Sanfuentes received every mention of Don Alejandro with a shrug and a giggle, Madame la Présidente did not appear to have heard of him.</p>
			<p>Suddenly there was a movement in the company. Someone had entered and taken the vacant chair by Janet’s side. The light in the room was very dim, and Archie saw only a tall figure, to greet whom the President and the other men rose and bowed. The man, whoever he was, was not in evening dress. Later, he saw Janet’s fair head inclined towards him, and from the vivacity of her manner she seemed to be finding interest in the new guest.</p>
			<p>At last, with a marvellous course of fruits and sweetmeats, the meal came to an end. The hostess rose heavily and led the ladies from the room, and the men moved up to a semicircle round their host. Room was made for Archie next to the President, and beyond that impressive figure sat the late arrival. With a thrill he recognised the man he had seen the first day leaving the office in the Avenida, the great Señor Castor, the <span xml:lang="es-ES">Gobernador</span> of the province of the Gran Seco and the head of the Company.</p>
			<p>Huge cigars had been provided, but the <span xml:lang="es-ES">Gobernador</span> had refused them, and, after asking his host’s permission, had lit a short briar pipe. It was some minutes before the President formally introduced them, being himself engaged in a whispered conversation, so Archie had the opportunity to study the great man’s features. Seen at close quarters they were not less impressive than in the fleeting view in the Avenida. The brow was broad and high, and had the heavy frontal development above the eyebrows which Archie had been told betokened mathematical genius. The complexion was pale, but clear and healthy; the nose short and finely formed, and springing from the forehead like the prow of a ship. The mouth was hidden by the beard, but it might be guessed that the lips were full. The eyes were the compelling feature. They were large and grey and set rather wide apart, and, though narrow-lidded, gave their possessor an air of steady, competent watchfulness. There was thought in them, and masterfulness, but no hint of passion, only a calm, all-embracing intelligence. Among the beady opaque eyes around him, this man’s were like pools of living light contrasted with scummed morasses. The face was grave and composed, but when Archie’s name was spoken it broke into a curiously pleasant smile.</p>
			<p>The <span xml:lang="es-ES">Gobernador</span> of the Gran Seco addressed him in flawless English. He inquired after his journey, spoke of the pleasure with which he had made Janet’s acquaintance, and, on being informed by the President that Archie was a member of the British Legislature, asked one or two shrewd questions about current British politics. In five minutes’ talk across the table he seemed to take soundings of Archie’s mind, and elicited his special interests. He even detected his love of birds, and had something to say of the need for a sound ornithologist to investigate certain of the mountain areas. Archie had a feeling that this astonishing man, if he had been told that his hobby was marine zoology or Coptic antiquities, would have talked about it with the same intimate intelligence.</p>
			<p>“You will visit us, I hope, in our little mountain kingdom. Perhaps you have heard of our Gran Seco?”</p>
			<p>“I’ve heard about nothing else. But there’s a hitch somewhere, and I’ve been told that we can’t get passports for the present.”</p>
			<p>The <span xml:lang="es-ES">Gobernador</span> frowned.</p>
			<p>“What incomprehensible folly! That is a matter which shall at once be set right. I cannot think how the mistake has arisen. Your hotel? The Constitución? Permits shall be sent round to you this afternoon, and you have only to fix the day of your journey and we shall make all arrangements. What must you think of us, Sir Archibald? Believe me, we are not accustomed to treat distinguished strangers with impoliteness.”</p>
			<p>The manner of the <span xml:lang="es-ES">Gobernador</span> was so open and friendly that Archie’s distaste for the Gran Seco and his memory of Don Luis’s talk straightway vanished. The President observed that in old days the Gran Seco had been a closed country, and that, as Sir Archibald would realise, it could not be thrown open in a day.</p>
			<p>“I am positive Sir Archibald will understand,” said the <span xml:lang="es-ES">Gobernador</span>. “We have established, as it were, a Sheffield and a Birmingham in a rude hill-country, and we must limit our administrative problems. The sixteenth century and the twentieth can coexist only if the latter is given in small doses. Slowly they will harmonise⁠—but slowly. You have the same problem in your India. I understand that you do not permit tourists, however well accredited, even to enter some of the hill-states.”</p>
			<p>“That’s true,” said Archie. “When I was there, they wouldn’t let me put a foot across the Nepal border.”</p>
			<p>“Also we are a big business, with our secrets, and we cannot have agents of our rivals prowling about the place, which is, so to speak, all one workshop. But we welcome visitors who recognise our difficulties and submit to our modest rules.”</p>
			<p>“It is the Yanquis who give trouble,” said the President darkly.</p>
			<p>The <span xml:lang="es-ES">Gobernador</span> laughed. “Some Yanquis. I do not share his Excellency’s distrust of the whole of that great nation. The bright special correspondent on the lookout for a ‘scoop’ is the most dangerous of created things. But we welcome the reasonable journalist. You may have read a series of articles on Olifa in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Saturday Evening Post</i>. There you had the Gran Seco accurately portrayed with our full assent. Yet on the whole it is not the journalist who perplexes us most. It is the Yanqui tripper on a circular tour. We cannot have them making drunken fools of themselves in a place where the prestige of the white man is his only security.”</p>
			<p>“There was an American party at the hotel,” said Archie. “Noisy young devils from a yacht. I think they went up to the Gran Seco a week ago.”</p>
			<p>The <span xml:lang="es-ES">Gobernador</span> shrugged his shoulders.</p>
			<p>“We do not antagonise the great, we who are business men. But those young people will not be given the privileges which await you, Sir Archibald.”</p>
			<p>Archie felt as if he were being treated with especial frankness and friendliness, and his susceptible soul was in a pleasant glow. Then the conversation became general, and he had leisure to observe the company. The <span xml:lang="es-ES">Gobernador</span> said little, the Olifero statesmen much, but it seemed to Archie that they all talked under his eye and for his approbation. After an argument there came a hush, as if they deferred to him for the ultimate word. But he scarcely spoke. He sat silent, watchful, now and then smiling tolerantly. Once only he intervened. The Minister of Finance was discoursing on some aspect of the policy of the United States, and his comments were caustic. The <span xml:lang="es-ES">Gobernador</span> looked across at Archie and spoke in English.</p>
			<p>“Yanquis are unpopular in England?” he asked.</p>
			<p>“No. I shouldn’t say that. Americans are popular with us, as they always have been. You see, we get the best of them. But the abstract thing, America, is unpopular. She always seems to have a rather left-handed Government.”</p>
			<p>A spark seemed to kindle in the other’s eye.</p>
			<p>“That is right. No section of humanity deserves blame. It is governments, not peoples, that offend.”</p>
			<p>Then the spark died out.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>As Janet and Archie walked back to the hotel they spoke of the luncheon party. They had taken the road through the old town, and were in the marketplace among the stalls.</p>
			<p>“That man Castor doesn’t belong here,” said Archie. “He has nothing in common with those bland Oliferos. He’s nearer to that lot,” and he pointed to a group of Indians in shaggy ponchos squatted by the fountain.</p>
			<p>“He is one of the most extraordinary people I ever met,” said Janet. “Can you guess what he talked to me about? Ossian⁠—Papa’s bête noire, you know⁠—Lord Balfour, and Marcel Proust! And I believe he could have talked just as well about clothes and Paris models.”</p>
			<p>“I never in my life got so strong an impression of all-round competence.⁠ ⁠… I like him, too. I think he’s a good fellow. Don’t you?”</p>
			<p>“I’m not so sure,” said Janet. “I should like to see him clean-shaven. I’ve an idea that the mouth under that beard of his might be horribly cruel.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
