<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-1" id="chapter-1-13" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3>XIII</h3>
			<p>About 8 p.m., when the dark had fallen, two men groped their way into a room in the oldest quarter of the city, just above the dusty hollow which separated it from the works area. It was a hut in a yard, reached by a circuitous passage among sheds and the back premises of low-class taverns. The place was very quiet, for the inhabitants were out in the main streets, eager to catch what they could in the troubled waters. It was also very dark, till one of the men struck a light and revealed a dirty little cubby-hole which had once been an Indian cabin. Then he put his back to the door and listened, as if he were expecting others to join him.</p>
			<p>The man at the door bore the marks of hard usage. He was dirty and dishevelled, there was a long shallow cut on his left cheek, and he limped as if from a wound in the leg. His face was white, his air was weary and dejected, but his eyes were as quick and ugly as a mad hound's. The other, who had seated himself on a barrel, was of a different type. He was neatly dressed in a dark suit, with a blue linen collar, a black tie, and a pearl pin. His face likewise was white, but it was with the pallor of settled habit and not of strain, and his eyes, opaque and expressionless, gave him an air of calm and self-possession.</p>
			<p>"How many's left?" said the man at the door, as if in answer to a question. "God knows, and He won't tell. Mollison got away from the last bloody show, and Snell was on the Regina roof and presumably escaped the round-up. Bechstein was never in the scrap at all, for he was in bed this morning with a touch of fever. Radin got off, I hear, and no one saw Molinoff after midday. Let's put our salvage at half a dozen. Enough to do the job, say I, if there's any luck left to us."</p>
			<p>The man on the barrel said something in a low voice, and the other laughed angrily.</p>
			<p>"That blasted Mexican was at the bottom of it. Of course I know that, but how in hell can we touch him? He has gotten five thousand men to protect his fat carcase. Poor old Kubek! He never spotted that Rosas was in the game or there would have been one dago less in the world. It's the other we're laying for, the man that Kubek got on the trail of but couldn't get up with. I don't know his name, curse him, but I know the cut of his jib. If I can put it across him, I'll die happy. He's been up here off and on for months, slipping about in the dark like a skunk, and leaving no trace but a stink."</p>
			<p>"He will not come here," said the man on the barrel.</p>
			<p>"I say he will. Mollison knew where to find him, for they used to drink together. Pete is the stricken penitent now, anxious to stand well with the new authorities, and that God-darned mystery man is the brain of the business. He wants to round up the remnant of us, and Pete's going to help him. He's coming here at half past eight to be put wise by Pete about certain little things that concern the public peace. I reckon he'll find the peace of God."</p>
			<p>There were steps in the alley, and the doorkeeper, looking through a chink in the boarding, was satisfied. He opened, and a man entered. It was a squat fellow with a muffler round his throat and the bright eyes of fever. "Snell's dead," he gasped as he dropped wearily on a heap of straw.</p>
			<p>A moment later there came the sound of double footsteps, and two men were admitted, one a tall man with high cheek-bones and the other a handsome youth with a neat fair moustache. Both wore bandages, one on his left arm and one across the forehead. But they seemed less weary than the others, and they remained standing, each with a hand in a side-pocket and their eyes fixed on the doorway.</p>
			<p>Once again came double footsteps and the little party fell as silent as the grave. A hat was put over the lantern. The man at the door held up a warning hand and did not open it, but stood back a pace. There was a sound of fumbling with the latch, and the door opened slowly. Two men entered, one a bearded giant whose coat had been rent so that the left side flapped over his shoulder and whose lips were bleeding, the other a slim, youngish man in an old tweed jacket and breeches of an English cut.</p>
			<p>No sooner were they inside than the covering was removed from the lamp. The doorkeeper had his back to the door, the man on the straw got to his feet, and the giant caught his companion from behind and held his arms. Four pistol barrels glimmered in the scanty light.</p>
			<p>"Hullo," said the newcomer. "There are more friends here than I expected. You have done me proud, Mollison."</p>
			<p>It was a strange and macabre scene. The man with the dark suit and the pearl pin sat unmoved on the barrel, his opaque eyes stolidly regarding him who seemed to be a prisoner. Bechstein, the man with the fever, had his revolver laid over one arm, as if he were uncertain of his shaking limbs. The doorkeeper lolled against the door-post grinning, Radin and Molinoff stood on each side like executioners, and the giant Mollison spat blood from his mouth, while his great face hung like a monstrous gargoyle over the slim figure of his captive.</p>
			<p>That captive seemed very little perturbed.</p>
			<p>"I owe you a good turn for this, Mollison," he said pleasantly. "Hullo, Bechstein! I heard you were ill in bed. I'm afraid you are taking liberties with your health.... I can't see very well, but can it be Radin, and, by Jove, Molinoff, too? The Devil has looked after his own to-day."</p>
			<p>"He hasn't looked after <i>you</i>, my friend," said Mollison. "Your number's up all right. You're going to be a quiet little corpse within sixty seconds, as soon as we have tossed for who is to have the pleasure of sending you to hell."</p>
			<p>"Well, let go my arm and let me draw my last breath in comfort. I haven't a gun."</p>
			<p>The giant ran one hand down the prisoner's figure. "True enough," he said, and relaxed his grip. "But don't move, or you won't have sixty seconds."</p>
			<p>"It's my right to kill the swine," said the doorkeeper. "I was Kubek's second-in-command and I owe him one for the chief."</p>
			<p>The plea seemed to meet with general acceptance, and the prisoner saw his time of probation shortened by this unanimity. For a moment he seemed at a loss, and then he laughed with a fair pretence of merriment.</p>
			<p>"By the way, you haven't told me what you have against me. Isn't it right that I should hear the charge?"</p>
			<p>"Damn you, there's no time to waste," said the doorkeeper. "You have been the mainspring of this tomfool revolution, which has already done in our best pals and will make life a bloody hell for the rest of us. We are going to give ourselves the satisfaction of shooting you like a dog before we scatter."</p>
			<p>"You don't even know my name."</p>
			<p>"We know your game and that's enough for us."</p>
			<p>The prisoner seemed to be anxious to continue the talk. He spoke slowly, and in a pleasant, soft voice. It might have been noticed that he held his head in the attitude of a man listening intently, as if he expected to hear more steps on the cobbles of the yard.</p>
			<p>"There's one here who knows me," he said. "Tim--Tim Lariarty," and he addressed the sphinx-like figure on the barrel. "You remember Arbuthnot. I was at Brodie's when you were at Ridgeway's. We got our twenty-two together, and we were elected to Pop the same day. You were a bit of a sap and got into the Sixth, while I never got beyond the First Hundred. You remember Sandy Arbuthnot?"</p>
			<p>The face of the man on the barrel did not change perceptibly, but there was a trifle more life in his voice when he spoke. "You are Arbuthnot? Of course you would be Arbuthnot. I might have guessed it."</p>
			<p>"Then for God's sake, Timmy, tell that blighter behind me to put down his gun. I'll take my medicine when it comes, but I'd like to tell <i>you</i> something. You're a clever chap with a future, and I've got something to say to you about the Gran Seco which you ought to hear. Give me five minutes."</p>
			<p>There was a protest, but the sphinx nodded. "Give him five minutes," he said and took out his watch.</p>
			<p>The prisoner began to talk in his compelling way, and unconsciously the interest of his executioners awakened. Being on the edge of death, he had no reticences. He divulged the whole tale of the revolution, and he made a good story of it. He told of Blenkiron's coming to the Gran Seco, of the slow sapping of the loyalty of the Mines Police, of the successful propaganda among the technical staff, of the organising of the Indian pueblas, in which he claimed a modest share. The others dropped their pistol-hands and poked forward their heads to listen. The five minutes lengthened to six, to eight, to ten, and he still held his audience. He addressed himself to the man on the barrel, and sometimes he lowered his voice till the doorkeeper took a step nearer.</p>
			<p>Then he became more confidential, and his voice dropped further. "How do you think it was managed? A miracle? No, a very simple secret which none of you clever folk discovered. We had a base and you never knew it. Go into the pueblas and the old men will speak of a place which they call Uasini Maconoa. That means the Courts of the Morning--Los Patios de la Mañana. Where do you think it is? Listen, and I will tell you."</p>
			<p>They listened, but only for his words, while the speaker was listening for another sound which he seemed at last to have detected. He suddenly caught two of the heads bent forward, those of Radin and Molinoff, and brought them crashing together. The doorkeeper could not shoot, because Mollison was in his way, and in an instant the chance was gone, for a blow on the head felled him to the ground. Mollison with a shout swung the dazed Radin and Molinoff aside and had his pistol in the air, when a report rang out and he toppled like a great tree, shot through the brain. The hut had filled with men, and the two whose heads had crashed and the fever-stricken Bechstein were throttled from behind and promptly pinioned.</p>
			<p>Then the prisoner showed what the strain had been by fainting at the feet of the man on the barrel.</p>
			<p>He came to himself, and found Peters holding a brandy-flask to his mouth. Peters had a whitish face.</p>
			<p>"My God, sir," he stammered, "you will never be nearer death."</p>
			<p>The young man seemed to have recovered, for he had strength enough to laugh.</p>
			<p>"I cut it pretty fine, but there was no other way. I had to make myself ground-bait if we were to catch these pike. We've got them all now.... I think I could have held them for another five minutes, but I chose to precipitate things. You see, I saw by the flicker of the lantern that the door was opening, and that meant you. If I hadn't thought of that head-crashing dodge, I think I might have stopped a bullet."</p>
			<p>The man on the barrel had risen and was looking sombrely on. The policeman jerked his head towards him. "What about that fellow?" he asked.</p>
			<p>"Oh, let him alone," was the answer. "He is free to go where he likes. He was at school with me, and I owe him a good turn for this evening."</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
