<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-2" id="chapter-2-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
			<p>In the Courts of the Morning there was still peace. The brooding heats, the dust-storms, the steaming deluges of the lowlands were unknown. The air was that of a tonic and gracious autumn slowly moving to the renewal of spring. The mornings were chilly, with a sea-fog crawling over the rim of the plateau; the days were bright and dry as old wine, the nights blue and starlit. There was peace in that diamond ether, but it was not the peace of lethargy but of ordered action. The place was as busy as ever, but it had no longer the air of a headquarters. It was now a base, a depot, and the <i xml:lang="fr">poste de commandement</i> was somewhere far below in the broken levels which spread dizzily towards the southern skyline.</p>
			<p>The Gobernador had been given his choice. “I can take you with me,” Sandy had said. “It won’t be a comfortable life, but you don’t mind that. Or you can stay here in the watchtower and follow our doings on the map.”</p>
			<p>“I am free to decide?” Castor had asked, and was told “Perfectly.” He had considered for a little and had finally chosen to remain. “I am your enemy,” he said, “and we should be at too close quarters for comfort. I shall stay here till something happens.”</p>
			<p>Sandy laughed. “I know what you mean. Well, I hope it won’t, but if my luck gives out don’t imagine that the show is over. You’re the only one in your class, but I’ve heaps of alternatives in mine. Archie will keep you posted and I’ll look in every now and then.”</p>
			<p>But Sandy did not come back.⁠ ⁠… The crowded days’ work went on; horse and mule convoys came daily up the mountain paths and departed with their burdens; the receivers ticked busily in the wireless station; aeroplanes⁠—fewer than before, for the fighting machines were mostly at advanced headquarters⁠—departed at dawn and returned often after nightfall, while flares like forest fires burned to guide them to their landing-places. There was a special activity in the glen which led to the sea; it seemed as if its defenders had reached the conclusion that that port to the outer world would soon be discovered and closed, for almost every night some kind of tramp put in and unloaded and stole out before the following daylight. Busiest of all were the two girls. Barbara was in charge of the hospital stores, and it seemed that these were now urgently needed, for in the plains below men were suffering. With her staff of peons she worked early and late, with Janet as an unskilled assistant.</p>
			<p>The latter had another duty laid upon her, and that was to provide company for the Gobernador. With Sandy’s departure he had become the prey of moods. His former equability had gone, and he appeared to swing between a profound abstraction, when he seemed unconscious of his surroundings, and a feverish interest in them.</p>
			<p>For example, he visited constantly the top of the ravine and would spend an hour gazing into the green depths which ended in a sapphire patch of sea. Once, when Janet accompanied him, he turned to her sharply.</p>
			<p>“This place could be forced,” he said. “Olifa has a navy.⁠ ⁠… It would take a week⁠—ten days perhaps⁠—and she would lose a thousand men, but it could be done. Then this sanctuary of yours would fall. How would you escape?”</p>
			<p>“I suppose by the hill roads to the south,” Janet answered.</p>
			<p>“But they will be blocked. It might be hard to force a way up here from that side, but Olifa could block the exits. What then?”</p>
			<p>“I’m sure I don’t know. I don’t believe both disasters could happen at once.”</p>
			<p>“Why not?”</p>
			<p>“Simply because things don’t work out that way.”</p>
			<p>He laughed angrily. “You are all children. You trust childishly to fortune. That’s well enough for Clanroyden and the others. They are soldiers and take chances. But what is to become of <em>you</em>?”</p>
			<p>“Barbara and I went into this with our eyes open.”</p>
			<p>“You were a fool, then. And your husband was a fool to let you.”</p>
			<p>There were many similar occasions when his face looked sharp and anxious and there was a hard edge to his voice. But there were others, when the mountain spaces seemed to work on him as an opiate and he fell into a mood of reflection. From these fits he would emerge with cheerfulness almost, certainly with philosophy. At such times he seemed to enjoy Janet’s company and would detain her in talk from her many duties. He would ask her questions about herself, her home, her views on life, with an engaging ingenuousness, as if he had discovered a new type of mortal and was labouring to understand it. He had a natural good-breeding which robbed his questions of all impertinence, and in this novel sphere Janet felt that she could regard him as an equal.</p>
			<p>“This hilltop is bad for me,” he once told her. “I have no facts to work upon and I begin to make pictures. Wasn’t it Napoleon who said that we should never think in pictures, but always look at things as if through a telescope⁠—bring reality close to one, but always reality?”</p>
			<p>“Isn’t that begging the question?” the girl replied. “Reality for us is what we make of things. We may make them conform to our picture. It is what we all do. It is what you have been doing all your life, Excellency.”</p>
			<p>“But your pictures and mine have been very different. I am a scientist and you are a romantic.”</p>
			<p>“You are the romantic. You have tried to force the world inside a theory, and it is too big for that. We humble people never attempt the impossible. You are a self-deceiver, you know.”</p>
			<p>“Why?” he asked.</p>
			<p>“Because of your intellectual pride. It is only humility that sees clearly and knows its limitations.”</p>
			<p>“Lord Clanroyden, for example, is humble?” There was a not unpleasant irony in his voice.</p>
			<p>“Profoundly.”</p>
			<p>“Yet he has challenged me. With his handful of amateurs he has challenged the might of Olifa. Was your Jack the Giant-killer humble?”</p>
			<p>Janet laughed. “I think he was. Jack saw that the giants were far bigger than himself, but that, being overgrown, unnatural things, they were bound to be stupid and weak.”</p>
			<p>“You think that a colossus is always weak?”</p>
			<p>“He must be if he is outside the human scale. If he has no other flaw, he will have the weakness of pride.”</p>
			<p>“You and your friends are very proud.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, I hope not. If we are, we shall be punished for it. Sandy⁠—Lord Clanroyden⁠—is daring, but that is not because he thinks too much of himself, but because he believes that he has great allies.”</p>
			<p>“Such as?”</p>
			<p>The girl quoted:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>“Exultations, agonies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And love, and man’s unconquerable mind.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Castor laughed.</p>
			<p>“That is Wordsworth, isn’t it? It is a good answer, Lady Roylance, from your point of view. I am prepared to admit that Lord Clanroyden has allies⁠—at any rate, he has friends. He need not be lonely.”</p>
			<p>“You are lonely?” she asked with kind eyes.</p>
			<p>“I have always been rather lonely.⁠ ⁠… Perhaps⁠ ⁠… if I had met someone like you⁠ ⁠… long ago⁠ ⁠… I should not be so lonely today.”</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>It was Archie who brought the first big news. One evening he appeared at dinner with his left arm in a sling. “Not a wound,” he explained. “It was my own dashed silliness in getting too near the business end of a mule. I’ve been having a giddy time and I’m badly short of sleep. How are things going? <i xml:lang="fr">Pas si bête</i>, as they say⁠—except for Sandy. Old Sandy has gone stark mad. At present it’s a useful kind of madness, but the question is how long it will be till he goes clean off his rocker. He’s been doing pretty desperate things.”</p>
			<p>Later he explained.</p>
			<p>“Lossberg is making war according to the books. Sandy sits down and thinks out very carefully what the books direct and then does the exact opposite. He is trying to draw the enemy deep into the country, and for that purpose he is making a feature of Fort Castor. We’ve a pretty useful Intelligence service, and the best part of it is that section which we put at Lossberg’s disposal. You see, having the country on our side, we have a lot of enthusiastic volunteers. Lossberg picks up some Indian or half-starved mestizo who is easily frightened into telling what he knows. The poor devil is obviously speaking the truth, for he is too scared and stupid to lie. Only what he says has been carefully pumped into him by our little lot. The result is that Lossberg has got it into his head that Fort Castor is our big base, and is stretching his claws round it as carefully as a cat stalking a mouse. He has moved up the better part of a division. But there’s nothing in Fort Castor except mounted patrols. We put up a beautiful camouflage and let Lossberg’s flying men have a discreet look at it once in a while. But when he takes the place after some trouble he won’t find a tin of bully beef in it.”</p>
			<p>Somebody asked where Sandy was.</p>
			<p>“He was in Magdalena yesterday. We are organised in two armies. Escrick, with the Army of the North, is now divided between Loa and Magdalena, and he has a covered line of communications between them through the hills behind, just like what Stonewall Jackson had in the Shenandoah valley. The enemy has spotted neither. Peters, with the Army of the South, is playing the same game. Lossberg thinks he is based on the Indian pueblas in the Tierra Caliente from which he can threaten the Mines, and consequently he has a division strung out from the San Tomé to the Universum and is building a sort of Great Wall of China in the shape of blockhouses. Peters just does enough to keep the Mines lively, but he isn’t worrying about them. All he wants is to get Lossberg rattled.”</p>
			<p>Archie pointed to the southeast corner of the big map.</p>
			<p>“There’s a spot there called Pacheco, just under the hills. That’s Peter’s real base. He’s got some nice country west of that for his scallywags to operate in. There should be news from that quarter pretty soon.”</p>
			<p>“Base?” he said in reply to a question of Castor’s. “Why, we haven’t any proper base, and we haven’t any communications to cut. We’re the most lightly equipped force in the world, for we don’t go in for high living. A bit of charqui and a bag of meal will last one of our fellows for a week. Also we know all the wells and water-holes, and Lossberg doesn’t. Water is going to give him a lot of trouble.”</p>
			<p>“Has he no one who knows the country?” Janet asked.</p>
			<p>“Not as we do. He’ll pick up somebody later, for we’re bound to have a traitor or two in our camp. Also there are your gunmen, Excellency. One or two of them have been a bit around. But he hasn’t got anybody yet, and has gone poking about, trusting to bad maps, and the lies we manage to feed him.”</p>
			<p>“What about his Air Force?”</p>
			<p>Bobby Latimer answered.</p>
			<p>“So far we’ve managed to keep it in order. We’ve nothing on them in the way of flying, for they’re nicely trained, but they can’t just fight in our way. And they haven’t any machines as good as our new Gladas. If this were a regular war, they’d be mighty good at contact work and bombing expeditions. You never saw prettier squadron flying. But we’ve no communications to bomb, and at present they’re wasting their efforts every night on Fort Castor.”</p>
			<p>“But do none of their planes get abroad and discover your real whereabouts? Magdalena, for example⁠—or Loa?”</p>
			<p>“So far we haven’t let them. We can beat anything they’ve got in place and we seem to have more appetite for a scrap. There’s been one or two very pretty dogfights. Besides, it don’t signify if they spot Magdalena or Loa or even Pacheco. We could shift somewhere else in a couple of hours.”</p>
			<p>“But you have a base.” It was Castor who spoke. “Where we are sitting now is your base. If they take this, you are lost. If they even bomb it, you are deeply embarrassed.”</p>
			<p>“I think that’s right,” said Latimer. “Therefore it’s up to us to let no enemy planes north of Loa. So far they haven’t shown any inclination in this direction. They’re too much occupied with General Peters.”</p>
			<p>“Yet at any moment they may discover it?”</p>
			<p>“There’s no reason in the nature of things why they shouldn’t,” said Archie. “But it’s one thing for a chance plane to spot us and another thing for Lossberg to exploit his knowledge.”</p>
			<p>Three days later Archie returned in high spirits. He had two pieces of news.</p>
			<p>The first was that Bobby Latimer had brought down an enemy plane north of Loa. The pilot and observer were alive, and the plane was not too badly damaged, so they had added one to their stock of aircraft⁠—a Seaforth monoplane, on the mechanism of which he discoursed at length. Happily they had the spares for it. He welcomed this new sign of enterprise on the part of Olifa as likely to relieve the tedium of his job. When Janet observed that, if one enemy could get as far as Loa, a second might get farther, Archie was reassuring.</p>
			<p>“The way I look at it is this. They’ve spotted Loa⁠—they were bound to hear of it from spies and suchlike. But they’re so darned unenterprising that only one of their planes gets through. If these things be done in the green tree, what shall be done in the dry? Loa is an easy mark, but this place from Lossberg’s lines would be dashed difficult, even for a swell like Bobby.”</p>
			<p>The other news was startling. Peters’s raiders had made the garrisons at the Mines nervous, and, since it was assumed that the guerrillas were based on the villages in the Indian reserve and drew their supplies thence, it was resolved to clear that country and bring the women and children into a huge concentration camp near the city.</p>
			<p>Archie was triumphant. “It’s what Sandy has been playing for, but he scarcely hoped to bring it off.⁠ ⁠… Lossberg thinks the Tierra Caliente is an asset to us. Good Lord! it’s a millstone round our necks. Presently we should have had to feed these villages⁠—a thing we had budgeted for⁠—and this means that we shall now be a thousand percent better off for supplies. He’s a humane man, your General Lossberg. The concentrados will be a long sight better off with him than on their own, and if they get pinched a little when he gets pinched, we had made our book for that. Soon we’ll all have to draw in our belts.⁠ ⁠… Sandy has made Lossberg hold the baby for him, which is what you might call strategy.”</p>
			<p>A light of reminiscence woke in his eyes.</p>
			<p>“That was always old Sandy’s way. Once at Crask, I remember, he fairly did <em>me</em> in. We were out rough shooting together and it was a blistering hot day. When we turned at the march burn, we were both a little bored, for we had seen very little, so by way of putting a spice of interest into the game, we agreed that I should carry what he shot and he what I shot, and I backed myself for a fiver to give him the heavier load. Well, I soon presented him with a hill partridge and a snipe, while he hadn’t let off his gun. Then I’m blessed if he didn’t shoot a roebuck and I had to sling the infernal brute on my back. After that he couldn’t miss, and I hadn’t the proper use of my arms. I staggered into Crask just about dead with heat, and laden like Balaam’s ass⁠—roebuck on back, string of grouse and blackcock round my neck, rabbits in my pockets, and one and a half brace of snipe in my hat.”</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>For a day or two the plateau drowsed in its bright aromatic heat, and no news arrived except what the Olifa wireless told⁠—how Lossberg had begun to clear the Indian country, and the rebels, baseless and foodless, were for certain no more now than bands of refugees clinging to the mountains’ skirts. Fort Castor, their chief centre, had been occupied without serious opposition. It was anticipated that soon there must be a general surrender. Olifa was marching to an easy victory, and the President, in a public speech, spoke contemptuously of the rabble of amateurs which had attempted to defy the disciplined forces of the republic. The comments of the foreign press were no longer guarded. The military critics congratulated themselves on their prescience, and wrote, almost with regret, of the mathematical certainties of modern warfare.</p>
			<p>Their views did not disturb Janet’s peace of mind, but she had her own anxieties. She had an apprehension of some calamity approaching, and studied the blue sky for that enemy plane which might break through their guard. The drone of a machine arriving sent her hurrying out-of-doors, and she would wake with a start in the night and listen for a beat in the air which would be different from the beat of their own planes. Castor seemed to share her excitement; his eyes also were always turning skyward.</p>
			<p>Then came two days of storm, when the thunder rattled among the crags of Choharua, and the rain fell in torrents, and the outlook was limited to six yards of swirling vapour. After that came a wind which threatened to uproot the huts, and which brought the sound of a furious sea even up to that ledge of mountain. During these days the wireless was disordered by atmospherics, but from its broken messages one thing emerged. Something had happened, something of vital importance, something which had got on Olifa’s nerves. It could not be a battle? Surely Sandy had never been betrayed into measuring his meagre strength in lists chosen by the enemy.</p>
			<p>Then one afternoon Archie arrived, a weary Archie who could scarcely speak for drowsiness.</p>
			<p>“Has there been a battle?” Janet demanded.</p>
			<p>“Not likely. But we’ve begun the offensive.”</p>
			<p>“What losses?”</p>
			<p>“None. Practically none on either side. But there’s been the deuce of a lot of destruction of property. Sandy says it’s cheaper than human life and just as effective.”</p>
			<p>“What have you done? Quick! Tell me.”</p>
			<p>“We’ve cut the enemy’s communications. I’m dropping with sleep, Janet. In six hours you’ll hear everything.”</p>
			<p>In six hours a washed, shaven, fed, and refreshed Archie told this story.</p>
			<p>“Ever since Lossberg started pushing out from the Gran Seco city, our army has more or less disappeared. He felt us, but he didn’t often see us, barring, of course, our planes. Yet he was being sniped and shelled and bombed a good deal and Peters kept him lively at the Mines. Two things accordingly happened. The first was that Lossberg, not being able to get us into the open, thought we were far stronger than we were and grew more cautious than ever. The second was that he thought we had all our men in two places⁠—up in the hills northeast of Fort Castor and in the eastern end of the Tierra Caliente. In that he was right⁠—more or less⁠—but he didn’t know the length of our range. The consequence was that he thought that the city and everything south and west of it were safe, but that the east and northeast were formidable and needed a big striking force. So he held the railway with only three garrisons between the city and the frontier⁠—at San Luca, at Villa Bar, and at Gabones itself⁠—and small posts of six men each every four miles.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2" id="noteref-2" epub:type="noteref">2</a></p>
			<p>Archie with pencil and paper drew a sketch of the railway.</p>
			<p>“You remember the big dry valley twenty-five miles down the line. I believe there’s occasionally a trickle in it in January, but just now it is like the Prophet’s Valley of Dry Bones. There’s a big viaduct crosses it⁠—sixteen arches, the biggest and costliest piece of engineering on the whole line. It would have taken a cog-and-pinion arrangement or miles of circuitous gradients to get the railway across the valley. So the engineers very properly decided on a bridge.</p>
			<p>“Blenkiron always had his eye on the San Luca bridge, and so had Lossberg, for he had a post at each end, twenty men with machine guns at San Luca station⁠—that’s the north end⁠—and thirty-five at the south end, at a place called the Devil’s Ear. It was the only part of the line about which he showed any nervousness. But his posts weren’t very well placed, for they were at the abutments of the bridge, and the bridge has sixteen arches, and the valley is more than half a mile wide, so that if there was trouble about the middle of the viaduct it would be some little time before the ends heard of it and arrived to help.</p>
			<p>“Blenkiron⁠—the scheme was his principally⁠—wanted to cut the line at a place where it would be hard to mend. San Luca was an obvious spot, especially as the bridge was unguarded in the middle, since it was calculated that wandering bandits could do no harm to the huge stone piers. Lossberg’s engineers in the Gran Seco could do any ordinary repairs that were required, but something very big would want help from Olifa. So Blenkiron’s second job was to make it pretty hard for Olifa to get to San Luca, and that meant a simultaneous bedevilment of the railway somewhere well to the south of the Devil’s Ear.”</p>
			<p>Again Archie had recourse to pencil and paper.</p>
			<p>“You see this point here, twelve miles north of Villa Bar and about twenty-three from San Luca. The railway runs in a deep cutting, the beginning of the long climb to the watershed. On the east side there’s a considerable mountain with a shaly face, which is shored up to prevent it slipping on to the metals. There was a little post about a mile off at a place called Tombequi⁠—half a dozen sleepy Oliferos who spent their days playing spadillo and begging for drinks from the passing trains.</p>
			<p>“Well, it was Peters’s outfit that got the job, and it was decided to make it a long-range business. You see, not one of our fellows had so far been seen within fifty miles of the railway after the city was surrendered, so Lossberg assumed that all was well there and took no precautions. We didn’t want to alarm him, so we took Pacheco for a base, the better part of one hundred and fifty miles off. It’s an ugly bit of country from there to the railway⁠—the south rim of the Gran Seco basin, and on the north face of the rim an abomination of desolation, all pitted and tortured red rocks like the Sinai desert. The crest, however, is flattish, with a good deal of scrub on it, and there’s water in one or two places⁠—the actual springs, I fancy, of streams that go down into the Vulpas valley. There used to be posts there, but Lossberg had no use for them, and on that bit of frontier all he has is a few mounted patrols which keep to the low ground on the north side under the rocks. Accordingly we fancied the high ground above the rocks, where there was nobody to spot us except vultures.</p>
			<p>“We left Pacheco last Tuesday night with Sandy in command. He insisted upon taking charge⁠—said he wanted a little fresh air and exercise⁠—I flew him over from Magdalena that evening. I never saw a fellow in such spirits⁠—filled with ’em, drunk with ’em. There were two parties⁠—one under a chap called Jervoise, mounted on wiry little Indian ponies, with some queer kit on their saddles. That was the Tombequi outfit. The San Luca crowd were coming in cars and weren’t due to start from Pacheco till twenty hours later. A place had been agreed on as a rendezvous.</p>
			<p>“It was a mad ride, and Sandy was the maddest thing in it. It looked as if he had been getting charged with electricity till he could hold no more and had to give some of it off in sparks. He’s fit again too, fitter than I’ve ever seen him before.⁠ ⁠… We climbed out of the levels up long glens of loess till we struck the stony corridor that runs between the ridges. There was a big white moon, and the shale looked like snowdrifts and ice couloirs. There wasn’t a sound, for there are no beasts or birds up there⁠—only the thud of hoofs, an occasional clash of buckles, and Sandy humming his crazy songs.</p>
			<p>“We did fifty miles before dawn, and then lay up for most of the day on the top of the ridge, where there were water and scrub. We were off again at nightfall, and next morning came to the place they call Tulifa, where there is a bad foot-track up from the Vulpas valley. Here we had to go cannily, for we had to get off the hills, which had become a series of knife-edges, and take to the sandy valleys to the north of ’em. Yet they made pretty fair cover for men in open order, and we had goodish guides, and by nightfall we weren’t twenty miles from the railway. The staff-work had been top-hole, for we got to the appointed rendezvous just fifteen and a half minutes late. The cars had come through without a hitch and had been hiding all day in a ravine. There were three of ’em⁠—Rolls-Royce chassis and bodies that looked like a travelling circus.</p>
			<p>“At the rendezvous we separated. Sandy transferred himself to the cars, for San Luca was the main objective, and I went with him. Jervoise trotted off with his bandits according to plan. They had to work exactly to schedule, for there was a big freight train due to pass Tombequi at forty-three minutes past nine. The plan was to let it pass and blow up the line behind it, while we blew up the San Luca bridge in front, and so bottled it up. Our motto was ‘Anything to give pain’!⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>“I wasn’t an eyewitness of Jervoise’s show, but it ran like a clock. The roads were difficult and the party had to split up, but the sections arrived to a tick, and the only chaps who could complain were the poor devils of horse-holders, and the Olifa post, who were surprised at supper and put in the bag. No⁠—there were no casualties, and we don’t take prisoners. Jervoise annexed their trousers, and turned them loose. He don’t like the raggedness of his outfit, and consequently has the eye of an old-clothes man for pantaloons. His lot made a fearsome mess, blew up the track in twenty places over a three-miles stretch, and tumbled down half the mountainside on it. Sandy reckons it will take a fortnight’s hard work to clear it.</p>
			<p>“I was in the San Luca push myself. There was a dust-storm blowing up from the east and the moon was covered, and as we had no lights and the road was naked prairie I’m bound to say I felt a bit rattled. If you’re loaded up with guncotton and blasting gelatine it isn’t much fun to be ricocheting from boulder to boulder. We couldn’t go slow and feel our way, for we had to keep to schedule time. But the weather was a godsend, for the wind drowned the noise of our wheels, and when we got to the bridge, the lights were burning clearly at each end and everything as peaceful as Clapham Junction.</p>
			<p>“We didn’t take long about the job, for the whole thing had been arranged to the last detail, with the help of a plan of the bridge provided by one of our fellows who had been in the railway shops. We laid the charges, lit the fuses, and, if you believe me, when we started off on the return journey we weren’t two minutes out in our reckoning.</p>
			<p>“It was all too easy, and that made me nervous. But we didn’t miss fire. In the War I saw a good many mines go up, but never anything like this. The empty valley became suddenly like Tophet, spouting sheets of greeny-yellow flame, while a mushroom of black smoke wavered above it. Then the wind blew the mushroom aside, and we saw that two of the arches had gone and that the viaduct was like a man’s mouth with the front teeth drawn.⁠ ⁠… After that there is nothing to tell. The posts on each side of the bridge started shooting into vacancy, and just as we left there came an agonised whistle from the south. It was the freight train slowing down to discover what the devil had happened.”</p>
			<p>Thus Archie to Janet. Before dinner he repeated the tale in its main features to Castor, who heard it with drawn brows.</p>
			<p>“I make you my compliments,” the latter said. “You have certainly instituted a new kind of war. Can Lord Clanroyden repeat the performance?”</p>
			<p>“Whenever he pleases. You see, we have the real mobility, and we have also knowledge of the country on our side. Lossberg already finds it hard to know what to do. He can’t police the whole Gran Seco, and as soon as he gets away from his bases we give him beans. We’re not too well off for stores, but we can always replenish at his shop.⁠ ⁠… No, we don’t mean to make the railway unworkable. We can’t afford that, for we want Lossberg to supply himself⁠—that he may supply us. He’s our <abbr>Q.</abbr> side. But we shall make it so difficult that the job will take up a lot of his time. He’s vulnerable, you see, and we’re not. We’re not in the same elements. It’s like a fight between a wolf and a shark.”</p>
			<p>“Then how can you hope for a decision?”</p>
			<p>“We don’t want any dramatic coup. We want to tire him out so that he’ll see it’s hopeless, and Olifa will make peace. On our terms, of course.⁠ ⁠… On your terms, that is to say,” Archie added.</p>
			<p>Castor smiled at the correction.</p>
			<p>“You are convinced that you are invulnerable?” he asked. “What about the air? Olifa has twice your number of machines.”</p>
			<p>“She can’t use ’em properly. That’s our almighty luck. They’re good average flying men, but they’ve no genius for the thing, and we’ve got the pick of the American fliers. Blenkiron saw from the first the necessity of that.”</p>
			<p>“If you had a genius against you it might be uncomfortable?”</p>
			<p>“To be sure. In the air you don’t reckon by quantity. One airman like Lensch⁠—you remember?⁠—the Boche who was killed in April ’18⁠—would put a different complexion on the business.”</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>It was Janet who first saw the stranger. She had gone for a before-dinner scamper on the downs, and had turned for home, when her eye caught sight of a small monoplane coming in from the sea. That was not a route taken by their own planes, and the girl halted and had a look at it through her glasses. It was a strange make, one she had never seen before, and suddenly she realised what it meant. Lossberg had at last broken the cordon, and the Courts of the Morning were discovered.</p>
			<p>As she galloped furiously towards the huts, she saw that the alarm had become general. The visitor had dropped low and was cruising scarcely two hundred feet up, getting a full view of the details of the place. There were no antiaircraft guns, and the rifle shots from the sentries left him unharmed.⁠ ⁠… Then one of their own planes rose, and the girl checked her horse to watch. The stranger let it approach, and then⁠—contemptuously, it seemed⁠—flew towards it. There was a burst of fire, the two planes seemed about to collide, and then by a curious manoeuvre the stranger slipped out and turned his head for the sea. She thought she saw a hand wave in farewell. It was indeed farewell, for the pursuing plane was utterly outclassed in speed. Almost in a minute, it seemed to her, the stranger was a speck in the pearly haze which marked the meeting of sea and sky.</p>
			<p>She found Archie and Castor outside the mess-hut.</p>
			<p>“Do you still maintain your invulnerability?” the Gobernador asked, but Archie did not hear. He was engaged in a passionate soliloquy.</p>
			<p>“There’s only one fellow in the world who could do that trick,” he exclaimed. “I’ve seen him do it a dozen times.⁠ ⁠… Who? A Frenchman called D’Ingraville. He used to go gunning for Lensch, and would have got him too, if Peter Pienaar hadn’t chipped in first. But D’Ingraville died long ago.”</p>
			<p>“I think you are mistaken,” said Castor quietly. “Captain Jacques D’Ingraville has been for several years a member of my staff.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
