<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-3" id="chapter-3-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3>I</h3>
			<p>General Alexander Lossberg, the Commander-in-Chief of the Olifa Expeditionary Force, was in a good temper as he took the air one morning on his smart little blue roan on the long ridge to the east of his advanced headquarters. It was nearly four months since he had occupied the city of the Gran Seco, and he felt that the situation was now satisfactory to his orderly mind. At first it had been rather an anxious business, this groping in the dark for an enemy whom it seemed impossible to locate. With his superb force⁠—his infantry divisions, his mechanised battalions, his cavalry brigade, his field batteries, and his light tanks⁠—it had irked him to find nothing to spend his strength on. But he had been patient and very cautious. The enemy had an unpleasant number of aeroplanes and knew how to use them⁠—he was a good soldier and could appreciate the merits of an antagonist⁠—and his repeated demands to Olifa for more planes had brought a meagre response. But, in spite of the semi-blindness which this weakness in the air involved, he had groped his way steadily to the identification and the capture of the enemy bases.</p>
			<p>There was Fort Castor⁠—that had soon fallen. The name set him musing upon the fate of him who had once been Gobernador of the Gran Seco. He had never liked him; he remembered the insolent calm of his eyes, and his habit of asking unanswerable questions. The man had been an arrogant civilian, and his cleverness was futile in war. He had heard that he was an unwilling figurehead, a prisoner in the hands of the guerrillero whom the people called El Obro, and whom he understood to be a Scottish soldier-of-fortune. Well, this El Obro, he was not much of a soldier; only a flashy amateur. The General had heard a good deal of talk in his time about the importance of the psychological factor in war, and was a little sick of it. Why should he trouble himself to read the mind of this guerrillero; he knew by instinct the kind of mind he had⁠—the ingenious schoolboy, treating war as a holiday game and banking on the unexpected. There was no such thing as the unexpected. War was an exact mathematical science. Cleverness and daring might delay for a week or two the advance of the great military machine, but in the end it crept forward, crushing opposition as a tank went through barbed wire and breastworks. Once again the professional had been justified, and the General flung out his chest and drew deep and pleasant draughts of the cool morning.</p>
			<p>Fort Castor⁠—and then Loa, and then the easy capture of the enemy’s secret base up on that shelf between the mountains and the sea. What was the name of it? Los Patios de la Mañana. An amusing name, the kind of name that those play-acting folk would choose. He had not yet visited the place, but he promised himself that pleasure soon. It was said to be very beautiful. He could imagine worse fates than to be the Governor of this province, and Los Patios might be an eligible site for a country house. Soldiering in Olifa itself had been a little tedious for a man of his energy. But Gobernador of this rich province⁠—that promised power, and amusement, and, of course, wealth. In these Latin republics he understood that there was a generous margin for those set in authority.</p>
			<p>The Mines had been his great problem. Olifa had always been nervous lest the enemy should so destroy them that their restoration would be a labour of years. One part of the danger had been removed when he occupied the city and the smelting works; the other, the Mines, had been made his chief preoccupation, by direct instructions from his Government. It had not been his own wish. He did not believe in tying himself up with anything in the nature of a fortress. He had been taught that it was a general’s duty to seek out the enemy and destroy him, and not to be entangled in the defence of property. His adversaries had guessed at this obligation, for they had made the Mines the scene of most of the fighting, and had managed by constant pin-pricking to tie up most of his troops on that long front.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>Yet, perhaps, in their blundering way the Olifa Government had been right. Against an enemy so light and elusive and with such a vast hinterland for retreat, their way had perhaps been the best. He remembered that he had not been very successful in his rounding-up expeditions. His cavalry nets had been drawn tight again and again without enclosing anything. The cavalry had indeed been a failure. It had been led a pretty dance by El Obro’s commandos, had been split up and destroyed in patches, had lost itself, had fought against itself in fog and darkness. As a gunner, he had never been a cavalry enthusiast, and now he was more disillusioned than ever. Also the tanks had not been a success, since there had been nothing solid against which to use them.⁠ ⁠… No, perhaps Olifa by some fortunate accident had judged right. This long-drawn defence of the Mines had done its part. It must have depleted terribly the enemy’s vanishing stock of munitions; he wished he could think that it had depleted his numbers. And now it was over. For three days the Mines front had been stagnant, and his patrols had reported no enemy force within twenty miles. The cause could only be that <i>débâcle</i> of munitionment which he had always foreseen and counted on.</p>
			<p>There remained Pacheco⁠—that robbers’ nest in the angle of the hills. That, he believed, was the main enemy headquarters, and he had been anxious for a long time to burn it out. This very morning he was advancing on Pacheco in strength. At last there was something to bite on. The result, of course, was a foregone conclusion, and after that⁠—? Where would El Obro find his next refuge? It was on Pacheco, no doubt, that the attempts on the Mines front had been based. It was from Pacheco beyond question that the raids on the railway had been launched. These raids had for some time been happily abortive, and, now that he had his blockhouse system nearly complete, the only danger was from an occasional bombing aeroplane⁠—if the enemy had any bombs left.⁠ ⁠… There was perhaps another base in the north-east⁠—he had some evidence of that. But what were these bases? Mere twigs on which to perch, and always being moved nearer to the inhospitable hills. You could not call that a base which supplied nothing in the way of food or shells. His military soul repudiated the name. He ran his mental eye over the map of the Gran Seco. The city and the railway to Olifa securely held; the Mines now free from all danger; the enemy forced out of the whole western, southern, and northern parts, and holding only an unknown corner in the north-east with driblets southward towards the Tierra Caliente. The war was over. The country was conquered. All that remained was a little minor police work.</p>
			<p>His reflections were so satisfactory that the General was compelled to ease his feelings by swift movement. He gave his horse its head against the slope, and, raising his cap, let the wind sing about him and ruffle his thinning hair. He drew rein at the crest and scanned the wide landscape. A fine soldierly figure he looked, his square tanned face flushed with exercise, his grey eyes with almost a boyish light in them, the slight heaviness and sullenness of mouth and jaw relaxed in good humour. He looked eastward where sixty or seventy miles away the great chain of the mountains stretched its white fingers into the unfathomable blue. He was no connoisseur in the picturesque, but suddenly those mountains gave him a feeling of pleasure. He felt a proprietary interest in this land, of which he might soon be Governor, and he was glad that his future satrapy included these magnificent creatures of God. They reminded him of his childhood, when from a Bavarian valley he had stared at the distant snows of the Wettersteingebirge.</p>
			<p>He turned, and before him lay the grassy barrens that stretched to the city. On his right he could see the slim headgear of the Mines, and the defences of that now stagnant front. The sight initiated a new train of thought. He had always meant to have the Mines started as soon as possible. That would be proof positive of his victory. When he had broached the idea to Olifa it had been received with enthusiasm; those bovine ministers could not comprehend the meaning of his operations, but they could appreciate such a result as the resumption of their great industry.⁠ ⁠… That very afternoon he would send a dispatch, and he would begin to work out the first stages.⁠ ⁠… And then a reflection brought him up with a jerk. Where was he to find the experts to advise him? What had become of those strange gentlemen who called themselves the Conquistadors?</p>
			<p>He had talked it all over with Romanes many weeks ago. He detested the type, the unwholesome pale faces, the low voices, the opaque eyes, which nevertheless in their blankness seemed to hold a perpetual sneer. But he had been instructed from Olifa to treat them with respect, and Romanes he found that he could get on with. The man had been a soldier⁠—a good soldier, he believed, till he had fallen down⁠—and he had not forgotten his earlier trade. The General had been impressed with the soundness of his military views. He had a contempt for anyone who fell out of his own hierarchy, but he did not show it, and Romanes had no doubt appreciated being treated as still one of the brotherhood. Romanes had been insistent on starting the Mines. Half-power, of course, at first; there would be a great lack of technical staffs and white foremen. But he was confident that all the labour needed could be got among the concentrados and prisoners, and that he and his colleagues could make up a skeleton staff.</p>
			<p>But that was nearly a month ago. General Lossberg had owed his professional success to his remarkable power of absorption in the task of the moment. He had been busy conducting a war, and he had had no ear for gossip. But he seemed to remember something. There were queer stories about those people. They lived on drugs and got them somewhere⁠—where was it? somewhere in the mountains? Yes. Olivarez had told him that they had gone to the mountains, they and the blackguard-looking fellows who had been Castor’s Bodyguard.⁠ ⁠… Why had it been permitted? He would have something to say to Olivarez.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>The General cantered across the baked yard in front of his quarters, and, giving his horse to an orderly, marched into the office of his Chief of Staff. Olivarez was older by several years than Lossberg, and, along with General Bianca, was the military pride of Olifa. He was a slight man, with a long olive-tinted face, a fleshy nose, and grizzled hair cut <i>en brosse</i>. He jumped to his feet as the General entered, and was about to speak, when he was forestalled.</p>
			<p>“What about that fellow Romanes, General?” Lossberg demanded. “I want to get hold of him at once⁠—him and his friends. I propose to start the Mines.”</p>
			<p>The other looked puzzled for a moment. He had something of his chief’s gift of absorption, and his mind had been much occupied of late by other matters.</p>
			<p>“Romanes, sir? Yes, I remember.” He turned the leaves of a big diary. “He left here on the 23rd of last month. Some private business. He was no use to us and we did not try to stop him. He was going into the mountains and was confident that he could get past General Peters’s patrols. There was some talk of a sea-plane which D’Ingraville had got hold of in Olifa. D’Ingraville, you may remember, sir, was formerly of the French Air Service. He left a request that we should keep in touch with him⁠—by air, of course⁠—and he gave us certain bearings and directions by which we could find him. I do not know if anything has been done about it. Shall I send for Colonel Waldstein?”</p>
			<p>Presently Waldstein appeared, a little man all wire and whipcord. He had something to tell, but not much.</p>
			<p>“We had Señor Romanes’s directions beyond doubt,” he said, “but it is one thing, sir, to be given a line and quite another to be able to take it. That does not need saying. We twice tried to make contact with him, but you will remember, sir, that three weeks ago the enemy planes were very active between here and the mountains. There is reason to believe that both the fighting scouts that we sent out were shot down. At any rate, they have not returned.”</p>
			<p>“Have you done nothing since then?” Lossberg asked peremptorily.</p>
			<p>“No, sir. Every machine we possess has been engaged in urgent business.”</p>
			<p>Lossberg tapped his teeth with a pencil; it was a habit he had when he was slightly ruffled.</p>
			<p>“There is now no enemy activity in that area, Colonel Waldstein,” he said at last. “You will please arrange that a machine is sent at once to the place indicated by Señor Romanes. No, send two, and send Hoffding carriers. I want Señor Romanes brought here at once, and as many of his colleagues as can be accommodated, and arrangements made for the transport here of the rest. Do you understand? The matter is urgent.”</p>
			<p>Waldstein saluted and went. Then Olivarez was given the chance of saying that which had been on his tongue.</p>
			<p>“There is a message from Pacheco, sir. We occupied it an hour and twenty minutes ago.”</p>
			<p>Lossberg’s face lit up. “But that is good business. Had we much trouble?”</p>
			<p>“No, sir. We were not opposed. The place was abandoned.”</p>
			<p>Lossberg stared blankly. “Abandoned, you say?”</p>
			<p>“Abandoned, sir. Not a shell was fired. No contact mines had been left. And apparently it had not been abandoned in a hurry, for every scrap of stores had been removed. The place had been deserted for several days.”</p>
			<p>The Commander-in-Chief, who was commonly a precisian in his speech, observed that he was damned. He stared with his eyes abstracted, thinking hard. He had always been contemptuous about psychology, but now he wished he could see a little into the mind of El Obro.</p>
			<p>“Where have they gone?” he soliloquised. “Peters had five thousand men there a week ago. I wonder what diabolical game he is up to now? There’s no way east or south. He has not come west, for we hold the land up to the southern scarp. He must have gone north. There’s something preparing up in that north-east corner which we have got to discover. Tell Colonel Waldstein to arrange for an extensive air patrol of the eastern Tierra Caliente. Let him take a radius of 150 miles. Yes, telegraph the news about Pacheco to the War Ministry. It will make a good headline for the papers. But do not mention that we found it abandoned. I will give all the details in my dispatch.”</p>
			<p>“The wireless is working very badly, sir,” said Olivarez. “We have been consistently jammed the last thirty-six hours.”</p>
			<p>“Atmospherics,” the Colonel observed. He had moments of longing for the old days of war, when you stuck to the heliograph, and the dispatch rider, and the telegraph. Then, somewhat perturbed, he went to breakfast. The crystal-clear vision of the future which he had had that morning on the savannah was a little dulled.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Towards the late afternoon of the same day one of the Hoffding machines returned, and with it the pilot of the other, which had crashed in one of the glens. It reported a difficult and disastrous journey. It had followed Romanes’s directions and made its way into the mountain range by an intricate series of valleys. It had found itself in a region where the wind came in baffling eddies, and where there was no possible landing-place. All the valleys were narrow and sheer and muffled with forest. It had discerned a shelf of flat ground, filled with the ruins of great stone towers. There, flying low, it had seen the remains of old camp-fires, but there were no human beings now in the place. After that came the disaster to its sister machine, the pilot of which had been saved by a miracle. Unless it attempted to fly over the main range, there was nothing more to be done, so it had come home to report.</p>
			<p>Late that night one of Waldstein’s patrols brought in a man who had been found in the tangled country under the lee of the mountains. He was half dead with fatigue and starvation, but had recovered sufficiently to ask to be taken to the General’s Headquarters. The General had not had the pleasant dinner which he had anticipated. The meal, instead of being a cheerful celebration of the capture of Pacheco, had been an anxious confabulation with his staff. For something had gone wrong with his communications, and he could get no answer from Olifa. In place of the lyric congratulations on success which he had expected, his message had been followed by utter silence. The long-distance telephone had never been noted for its reliability, but hitherto the telegraph service had been perfect. Now, with the wireless out of gear for two days, it looked as if this too had failed. That, or some intense preoccupation at the Ministry of War. Consequently, when Olivarez brought in the rag of humanity which his patrol had picked up, it was with no friendly eye that Lossberg regarded him.</p>
			<p>“We cannot find Señor Romanes,” the Chief of Staff had said, “but this is one of those who were with him. One of the gentry whom Castor called his Bodyguard. He says he has something for your private ear. Jesucristo! Wherever he came from he has had a rough journey.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Daniel Judson had not been improved in looks by his recent experiences. His clothes hung in rags, his skin was black with exposure, and short commons had sharpened his face so that his big head tapered to a jackal’s mask. Normally his broken nose and rabbit teeth gave him a touch of comedy, ferocious comedy⁠—but now these features seemed to be blended into one overwhelming impression of something snarling and ravening. The slouch of his thick-set shoulders gave him the air of crouching for a spring, like a mad dog. He had had food, of which he had eaten sparingly, being used to similar experiences and knowing the danger of a glut. Lossberg gave him permission to sit down, while his story dribbled out through the confusion of fatigue.</p>
			<p>Most of it was startlingly new to the General and his staff. He spoke of a camp at Los Tronos del Rey. “Those guys had to have the dope, and the Indians fetched it.⁠ ⁠…” He told of the daily expeditions and of the discovery of a pass through the mountains which had excited Romanes.⁠ ⁠… “We were expecting you to send to us, but you never came, so <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Romanes, he tried to get to you. The Indians must have double-crossed us, for nothing happened. We sent out Magee, and he never came back. Then the Indians turned nasty. There was a woman we had with us and she got away. The Indians must have helped her, and they cut the bridge behind her, and next morning the whole outfit did a bunk. After that we were between a rock and a hard place. There was a lot of unpleasantness with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Romanes, but by and by we see’d we couldn’t do nothing by fighting each other, so we shared out the grub, and took what we each thought was the best road off that bloody mantelpiece.⁠ ⁠… I started out with two pals, and I don’t know where in hell they’ve got to.” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Judson appeared to be going to be sick at the recollection. He recounted haltingly something of his troubles, first in the forest and then in the glens of the foothills. Famine had been the worst. “A biscuit would ha’ rattled in my stomach like a buckshot in a tin pan.” He had several times decided that he was about to perish. “This world one time, then the fireworks,” was the way he expressed his anticipation. By and by he had become so feeble that he could only crawl and weep, and in that condition the patrols had found him. Even now he had not the strength of a new-born cat. “If I slapped a fly this moment, I’d fall down.”</p>
			<p>Lossberg fastened upon one item in his story, the pass through the mountains. Judson strayed into vague profanity. He didn’t rightly know how to describe it, but they had found it all right, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Romanes had thought it as important as hell. That was why he had made his despairing effort to get in touch with the General. Judson’s brains were too befogged to explain further, but he quoted a sentence of Romanes. “<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Romanes, I heard him say to the long Frenchy, him that was the airman, ‘By God!’ he says, ‘if we don’t stop that bolt-hole the rebs one fine morning will be breakfasting in Olifa.’ ”</p>
			<p>Judson was dismissed, and the General looked at his Chief of Staff.</p>
			<p>“Romanes is not a fool,” he said, “and he has been a soldier. He has found out something which he wanted badly to get to us. Remember he is on our side. Except by our victory he and his friends cannot get back to the life they enjoy. What is that something? A road through the mountains into Olifa? We have always understood that there was no road, no practicable road, except that which the railway follows. There may be a pass which we know nothing of. Romanes knows about it. The question is, does El Obro? If he does, it would explain Pacheco.”</p>
			<p>The two men talked long and gravely. One result of their conference was that Waldstein was given fresh orders. His air patrols must move a little farther south and explore the valleys east of Pacheco. At all costs they must find Señor Romanes and his companions, who must now be making their way down from the hills.</p>
			<p>Lossberg had a disturbed night, but about ten next morning he had news which cheered him. There had been a sudden revival of enemy activity in the north part of the province. Mounted bands had been seen west of the line Fort Castor-Loa, and a motor convoy, bound for the latter place, had been captured. To Lossberg this was reassuring tidings. It seemed to explain the whereabouts of Peters and his Pacheco force. They had not gone south through any mysterious pass in the mountains, but north, to join the oddments up in that north-eastern corner. The General convinced himself that what he had always foreseen had now come to pass. The enemy was confined to the north-east of the Tierra Caliente, and all that remained was slowly and drastically to bring him to book. He would of course make sallies from his beleaguerment, but it would not be hard to cope with the desperate efforts of weak and ill-provided men.</p>
			<p>Yet the whole of the following week was taken up with these sallies. The enemy had changed his tactics, and adopted a vigorous offensive. The Mines front was stagnant, and Lossberg was able to move one infantry division and all his cavalry to the threatened north.</p>
			<p>The first thing that happened was that Loa fell to the guerrilleros, and the garrison in the Courts of the Morning had its land communications cut. This was interpreted by Lossberg as a feint, for Loa could be no value to the enemy. In this he was right, for after its stores had been removed, Loa was abandoned.</p>
			<p>But the next move was startling, no less than a raid on the Gran Seco city. It happened about 1 <abbr>a.m.</abbr> on a night when there was no moon. The enemy cut up the pickets, and for nearly four hours held all the city west of the smelting works and north of the railway station. The thing had been beautifully arranged. The raiders, who seemed to know the place intimately, occupied the key-points, and used the machine guns they had taken at the northern approaches. They knew, too, where the stores were, and helped themselves to what they wanted, loading the loot into light motor-wagons which had only the day before arrived from Olifa. They destroyed a freight train in the railway yards and put no less than seven locomotives out of action. It was artful destruction, done by men who were skilful mechanics, and it would take weeks to repair. Then, after setting fire to the Gran Seco Club as a final <i>feu de joie</i>, they made off at their leisure, taking with them the light motor-wagons. It was well after daybreak before Lossberg’s first reinforcements arrived, for the telephone and telegraph wires had been comprehensively cut. An attempt to follow was made with armed cars, but the pursuit struck the rear of the raiders about forty miles north-east of the city, was ambushed, and badly cut up. The enemy had vanished again into his north-eastern fastness.</p>
			<p>All this was disquieting, but yet in its way consoling. Judson’s story had deeply impressed the Commander-in-Chief, and he was relieved to have discovered the whereabouts of the Pacheco force. It must have joined the bands under Escrick, for hitherto Escrick had been far too weak to think of an offensive. So he set about with a will the task of hunting down the remnant. He established a cordon of posts in a line from the Mines to Loa, and, based on each extremity, he had a mobile force of cavalry and mechanised battalions. He believed that this cordon could not be pierced, and his plan was slowly to push it forward till he had driven the enemy into the mountain valleys. Of these he would then seal up the ends, and starve him out.</p>
			<p>But the cordon was pierced, repeatedly pierced. There was no further raid on the Gran Seco, but there was a disastrous dash on the Mines, which ended in the explosion of a shell-dump and the shattering of two engine-houses. Marvellous to relate, too, there was a raid on the railway, from what base no man knew, and the line was badly damaged in the crucial section between Tombequi and Villa Bar. Also there were perpetual pin-pricks. Not a convoy seemed to be able to move on any of the Gran Seco roads without some regrettable accident⁠—a mined road, a broken culvert, a long-distance sniping of baneful accuracy. Lossberg, who had regarded the campaign as over, was forced to admit that it had miraculously entered upon a new phase.</p>
			<p>In the thick of this guerrilla warfare the General forgot his other problems. He was kept so feverishly busy that he omitted to worry about the silence of the Olifa Ministry of War and the absence of a reply to his message about Pacheco. He was moving fast about the country and did not remember to inquire whether Waldstein’s machines had picked up any news of the Conquistadors. Waldstein’s machines were now on other duties. But there came a night when he was able to return to his advanced Headquarters, which had remained in the vicinity of the Mines. He dined alone with Olivarez, the first peaceful meal he had had for ten days. Both men were in better spirits.</p>
			<p>“It is the last spasm of a dying animal,” said Lossberg. “Now we know to a decimal the worst he could do, and we know that he cannot repeat it. In a week this activity will die down, and we shall turn to the question of starting the Mines. Even now it is police work we are engaged in, not war.”</p>
			<p>Olivarez nodded and smiled. “By the way, we have news of the Conquistadors. Señor Romanes is here, and the man they call Larbert, the Englishman.”</p>
			<p>“I will see them after dinner,” was the answer. General Lossberg filled himself a glass of champagne⁠—he had allowed himself champagne that evening⁠—and looked complacently at its sparkle. He had had an annoying time, but he had come to the end of it.</p>
			<p>The telephone bell rang, and Olivarez took the receiver. “It is from Olifa at last,” he said over his shoulder. “A message forwarded from Base Headquarters.”</p>
			<p>The General continued to contemplate his glass, with a smiling face. He awaited the congratulations which were his due. Suddenly he was startled to attention, for his Chief of Staff was speaking in an odd voice.</p>
			<p>“Repeat,” he said, and again, “Repeat!” He turned to Lossberg without hanging up the receiver and his hand trembled.</p>
			<p>“I can’t make it out.⁠ ⁠… It must be a mistake.⁠ ⁠… It is from Santa Ana, not Olifa. I don’t know who sent it.⁠ ⁠… Good God, it can’t be true!”</p>
			<p>“What is it, man?” Lossberg asked.</p>
			<p>“It says that Santa Ana was captured this morning by the enemy. Santa Ana! By the American Blenkiron, who was known here as Rosas!”</p>
			<p>Lossberg’s face whitened, but he retained his composure. He even laughed, a little harshly. “If that is true, El Obro is assuredly through the passes.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
