<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-3" id="chapter-3-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3>III</h3>
			<p>The succeeding days were full of bustle and excitement, for the train had been lit and the explosions were beginning. The road and railway to the Gran Seco were destroyed by Blenkiron with the completeness of a great engineer. The revolt of the troops at Pecos went like clockwork. Also the naval base at Cardanio was easily surprised, and the Olifa navy, except for two destroyers in Olifa harbour and a few patrol boats along the coast, was quietly put out of action.</p>
			<p>But on the first news of success there followed less comforting messages. The concentration at Veiro was going slowly. The ordinary Olifero was nervous, and hesitated to declare himself till he was certain which was the winning side. At Alcorta, too, the industrial centre, there was a danger of Communist trouble, which would immobilise forces which should have been marching north.</p>
			<p>“Whoever said ‘<i>Il n’y a que le premier pas qui coûte</i>,’ ” Sandy told Janet, “was a fool. It is blindingly untrue of revolutions. The first step is easy. You can always start with a bang. It’s the second step that is the devil. We haven’t succeeded, or anything like it, for the country hasn’t risen, and it isn’t certain by a long chalk whether it is on our side. It is waiting to see how the cat jumps. We’ve got my Gran Seco troops, and about four thousand of the regulars. Add Luis’s recruits and we may have a total of twelve thousand. Also we’ve temporarily bottled up Lossberg. But the Government has far more than three battalions in the city, as we believed. They’ve the better part of a division, and they’ve the pick of the artillery. Old Bianca is no fool, and they’re fortifying like blazes. We haven’t yet the strength for a <i>coup</i>, and it’s a question whether we’ll ever get it. It’s all a question of <i>moral</i>. Unless we can bluff the Government into a surrender by cracking their <i>moral</i>, we can’t force them.⁠ ⁠… Oh yes, once they surrendered it would be smooth going. The cat would have jumped and the whole country would be behind us. But you can’t run a revolution, as Luis thinks you can, on a handful of grandees.”</p>
			<p>“What is the worst that could happen?” Janet asked anxiously.</p>
			<p>“That Lossberg should break out. That would blow us sky-high. He would stiffen the Government, and put the fear of death on the Oliferos. They’re not going to stand up against the first-class regular army they have bought and paid for. Down on these plains Lossberg would drive us like sheep, and we should all go to heaven in a whirl of aimless glory.⁠ ⁠… Janet, I’m sick with anxiety. I’ve brought you and Archie into this mess, and it’s the kind of mess I don’t understand.”</p>
			<p>He looked far more haggard than she had ever seen him in the Gran Seco.</p>
			<p>“You’re tired to death,” she said, and knew that she was talking nonsense.</p>
			<p>“I’m not tired,” he replied wearily, “but I’m out of my element. I hate war, except my own sort, and any moment this may become the hopeless ordinary kind that I detest and am no good at.⁠ ⁠… You see, this isn’t my country, and it isn’t yours or Archie’s. We can’t feel about it like Luis and the others. I’ve done what I set out to do, and spiked Castor’s guns. But the curse of life is that you can’t stop short when you want, and I seem to have landed you all into the fire out of the frying-pan.⁠ ⁠… The worst of it is, I can do nothing. There’s no job for me here. El Obro is dead and buried, and I’m only a foreign filibuster mixed up in a show for which he has no heart.”</p>
			<p>Yet he seemed busy enough. He was splitting up his command, and had already parted with most of the white mounted troops. Only his Indians remained, under their white officers; it had always been decided to reserve them to the last, because of their effect on the nerves of the Olifa population. Of them he had now a little over a thousand.</p>
			<p>They were paraded one evening, tall, lean men on little wiry horses, who by now had almost the discipline of cavalry and were also trained marksmen. Janet and Barbara stood beside Sandy, as he watched them pass in the dusty sunlight.</p>
			<p>“A fine lot,” he said. “These fellows have something to fight for. Thank God, they’ll never go back to the old slavery. If the worst happens, there’ll be a new breed of bandit in the hills.”</p>
			<p>Behind them appeared Bobby Latimer. The aeroplanes had been left in the Gran Seco, all but one flight, which kept Charcillo in touch with Luis and Blenkiron. Bobby himself made long private patrols mostly in the direction of the city. That day, however, he had shaped his course for the north.</p>
			<p>As he saluted, Janet saw that his face was solemn.</p>
			<p>“There’s hell loose in the passes, sir,” he said. “I have been up the road we came from the Gran Seco, and somebody’s put Lossberg wise to it. There’s a good-sized army on its way down⁠—ten troops of horse, and about four thousand infantry, and an unholy lot of light batteries. They were in the Thunderer Valley three hours ago, and should make the place we called the Tennis Court before dark. To-morrow evening they’ll be on the Vulpas.”</p>
			<p>A slow smile spread over Sandy’s face.</p>
			<p>“I spoke too soon,” he said to Janet, “when I complained that I had nothing to do. I’m about to be the busiest man in this continent. Bobby, when you’ve fed and washed, you go off to Don Luis. I’ll have a message written out for you. Janet, dear, run and tell Rogerson to be in my room in half an hour. I’ll wait and have a word with Ackroyd.”</p>
			<p>“It’s pretty serious, isn’t it, sir?” Latimer asked.</p>
			<p>“It’s so serious that if that column shows its nose on the Vulpas we may chuck up the sponge. But thank God, it’s still in the narrows. I’ve got a thousand men⁠—three times what old Leonidas had⁠—and I’m going to try the Thermopylæ stunt.”</p>
			<p>He found his arm clutched by Barbara.</p>
			<p>“Is it worth it?” she cried, and even in his absorption he noticed that her face had gone very pale. “Is it worth it?” she repeated. “We can’t spare you.⁠ ⁠… Nobody came back from Thermopylæ.”</p>
			<p>Her eyes sobered him. He even flushed slightly.</p>
			<p>“I’m coming back all right, Miss Dasent, and so are my men. I might be spared, but we couldn’t do without <i>them</i>. We’re not brave like the Spartans. Our Thermopylæ is going to be a more cunning affair than the old one.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
