<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-1" id="chapter-1-12" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3>XII</h3>
			<p>When the <i>Corinna</i> was beginning to move out of the dusky harbour of Olifa, a wireless message was sent from it to an address in the Gran Seco. That message consisted of two words: <i>Francis First</i>. There had been various schemes agreed upon for the handling of the Gobernador, and the numeral was intended to signify the one which had been adopted. By a happy chance, the first and simplest had succeeded.</p>
			<p>The receipt of this brief message was like a spark to powder. The events of the next few days in the Gran Seco cannot be told in orderly history. They had the speed and apparent inconsequence of moving pictures, and can only be set forth as flashes of light in a fog of confusion.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>At the Universum Mine the manager woke as usual, breakfasted on his veranda, read his mail, and was a little surprised that certain telephone calls, which he had expected, had not come through from Headquarters. He was about to ring for his secretary and bid him call up the Gran Seco city, when the chief engineer, a Texan named Varnay, appeared on the scene and accepted a cup of coffee and a cigar. The manager was a newcomer who had been specially chosen by the Gobernador, a highly efficient machine whose pragmatic soul dwelt mainly in graphs and statistics. The Texan was a lean, lanky, hollow-eyed man, whose ordinary costume was dirty duck trousers and shirt-sleeves. To-day he wore breeches and boots and a drill jacket, and in his belt was an ostentatious revolver. The manager opened his eyes at this magnificence and waited for Varnay to speak. He was itching to get at his secretary and start the day’s routine.</p>
			<p>The Texan was in no hurry. He poured himself out a cup of coffee with extreme deliberation, lit his cigar, and blew smoke-rings.</p>
			<p>“The new draft will be in by midday,” said the manager. It was the day in the month when a batch of fresh labour arrived, and what Peters had called the “returned empties” began their melancholy journey to the pueblas.</p>
			<p>“Yep,” said the Texan. “The outgoing batch went last night, and the new outfit arrived an hour ago.”</p>
			<p>The manager jumped to his feet. “Who altered the schedule?” he cried angrily. “Who the hell has been monkeying with my plans? I’ve had the schedule fixed this last month, and the Universum Mine has got to be run according to it. I’ll flay the man that stuck his clumsy hoof into it.”</p>
			<p>He was about to cross the veranda to the bell which would have brought his secretary when the quiet drawl of the other detained him. The Texan had stuck out his long legs, and was regarding with abstracted eyes a butterfly which had perched on his coffee-cup.</p>
			<p>“Sit down, mister,” he said. “Things have been happening this morning in this outfit, and I got to put you wise about them. The Universum is closed down till further notice.”</p>
			<p>“By whose order?” the manager barked.</p>
			<p>“By the Gobernador’s.”</p>
			<p>The manager cursed with vehemence and point. He was the boss, and any instructions from Headquarters came through him. What misbegotten son of a yellow dog had dared to usurp his authority? If this was a hold-up⁠—-</p>
			<p>“Say, this love-talk don’t cut no ice,” said the Texan without heat. “You haven’t been let in on this scheme, because you’re a newcomer and wouldn’t have got the hang of it. Say, listen. Things have been going crooked in this little old country, and his Excellency is going to straighten them out. Those dagos in Olifa are giving us a dirty deal, and we reckon it’s time a white man took charge. It ain’t sense. We’re using up these poor goldarned Indians and chucking them aside like old boots. That’s bad business, mister, and the pueblas won’t stand for it.”</p>
			<p>“You fool! What can the Indians do?”</p>
			<p>“You’d be surprised,” said Varnay gently. “But it ain’t the Indians only. There’s the Police, and there’s all of us white men who think the time has come for a clean-up.”</p>
			<p>“Man, that’s rebellion,” the manager cried, his orderly soul shocked to its roots.</p>
			<p>“Why, yes. I guess it’s rebellion. But you’ve no cause to get scared, for we’re not rebelling against the boss. It’s our boss rebelling against Olifa.”</p>
			<p>“You’re a liar. Headquarters would never be such Godforgotten idiots. They’re business men and know where their profit lies.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t say there mayn’t be some pikers at Headquarters and a bit of trouble, but I reckon that his Excellency Señor Castor is a mighty clever man, and it’s him we follow. Why, the vaqueros are all wearing medals with his face on them, and they look up to him as a God Almighty.”</p>
			<p>The shaken manager at last turned to the telephone. But there was no answer from Headquarters and the bell failed to bring his secretary.</p>
			<p>“The lines were cut last night,” said Varnay, “after our orders came through.⁠ ⁠… But see here, mister. We want to treat you on the square. You’ve not been let in on this deal, and you’ve no cause to mix yourself up in it if you don’t want to. We’re going to town presently, but there’s no reason why you shouldn’t get on ahead and judge things for yourself. There’s an automobile at your disposal whenever you like to start.”</p>
			<p>The manager took the hint, and departed with a box full of confidential papers and the balances left in the pay-chest. He was loyal to his employers, but it remained for him to find out who these employers were.</p>
			<p>At the Alhuema Mine things went with equal smoothness, for the manager there was in the plot. But at the San Tomé there was some unpleasantness and for an hour or two a difficult situation. The San Tomé manager had only just come, having been before in the Administration at Headquarters. He was a young American from Montana, who had had experience of copper-mining in half a dozen quarters of the globe, and had earned a reputation as a go-getter and a firm handler of coloured human material. He was set on making good, for there was a girl waiting for him at home, and he had the contempt of the youth of his country, scientifically trained and furiously ambitious, for all things which cannot be set out in graphs and figures. Also, having just come from the city and having heard for months the intimate talk of Headquarters, he was not easy to bluff.</p>
			<p>The situation was complicated by the fact that the white technical staff of the mine were not unanimous. Three of the engineers had refused to join in the plot, and had only refrained from prematurely exposing it on being assured that the thing had failed and had been abandoned. Moreover, when the ringleader, a Scotsman called Melville, received the message which was to fire the train, it was found impossible to cut the telephone line to Headquarters. The outgoing draft of labour was too slow in starting, and the incoming draft, which was to give the rebels their armed force, was unaccountably delayed. The night was spent anxiously by Melville and his colleagues in a vain attempt to get into touch with Peters and the police. But Peters had his own troubles, for his squadron also had its doubtful elements. Headquarters had taken alarm and had just drafted into it some of the more desperate characters in the Mines guard. The consequence was that there was shooting, and at daybreak, when Peters had his force ready for the road, two dead men and three trussed-up prisoners were left behind.</p>
			<p>Early in the morning, when Melville played his hand, the young manager was beforehand with him. The manifesto of the malcontents infuriated him, and their use of Castor’s name did not convince, for he rang up Headquarters and thereby precipitated trouble in the city two hours before it was due. Believing that he had to deal with a piece of common brigandage, and having been promised immediate reinforcements, he resolved to hold the fort. He had the three malcontent engineers, his staff of Olifero clerks, his half-caste servants, and his own stout heart. He put his house into a state of defence, and he had one conspicuous asset, for in the same building was the magazine of explosives, and, with such perilous stuff about, his assailants must go circumspectly.</p>
			<p>About 10 <abbr>a.m.</abbr> Peters arrived with his police. The manager took them for his reinforcements, and Peters might have entered his house and taken peaceful possession, but for the fact that his greeting by Melville was observed from an upper window. A parley was attempted, and Peters and the manager sat opposite each other in chairs on the veranda, each with a revolver on his knee. The policeman was no diplomatist. His temper had been soured by his difficulties in the night watches, and he talked to the manager like a sergeant to a recruit, and was met by a stiff defiance. Did he imagine that a rising of Indians and a few mutinous police would worry the Gran Seco, much less the republic of Olifa with its potent army? The thing was moonshine. That the Gobernador was a party to it was an impudent lie. The manager knew the mind of the Administration better than any bush policeman. He would hold the place till succour arrived, and if there was any attempt to rush his defences, they would all go to glory⁠—and he nodded towards the magazine. Peters retired discomfited, for he read in the stiff chin and the frosty eyes that this man would be as good as his word.</p>
			<p>The <i>impasse</i> continued till noon, while Peters and Melville consulted anxiously, for this delay was dislocating the whole programme. Then at long last the incoming Indian draft arrived, and with it a young man, the Olifero called Carlos Rivero, who had chaperoned Janet and Archie on their journey to the Gran Seco. When he heard of the trouble he proposed to interview the manager a second time, and under a flag of truce the two sat again on the veranda. But Rivero had no revolver on his knee.</p>
			<p>What he said can only be guessed. But as an Olifero of an ancient stock he must have spoken with an authority denied to Peters. It is probable that he told the manager quite frankly certain things of which Peters had no knowledge. At any rate, he seems to have impressed him, and to have shaken his obstinacy. But the faithful servant demanded proof. If he were to act without superior instruction, he must be convinced that he yielded to the strongest of all arguments.</p>
			<p>“Right,” said Rivero. “You shall have your proof, Señor. You are familiar with the sight of an incoming draft⁠—sullen, wolfish men herded by the police? Come and see what I have brought you. You have my word of honour that, if you are not convinced, you can return to this place to continue your defiance. More, Señor Melville shall be brought here and remain as a hostage.”</p>
			<p>The manager accompanied Rivero to the compound behind the Mines buildings which was reserved for the Indian labourers. And this is what he saw. A compact body of five hundred men, mounted on small wiry horses and each carrying a rifle at his saddle-bow. These lithe figures were very unlike the weary, hopeless automata that had been accustomed to stumble into the compound. They held themselves erect, and, if their faces were sullen, it was the sullenness of a grim purpose. There were white officers and sergeants among them in the uniform of the Police, but the impressiveness of the spectacle was not in them, but in the solid, disciplined ranks of fighting men sprung out of an older age.</p>
			<p>“These,” said Rivero, “are the labourers whom the Gobernador is now calling to his side.”</p>
			<p>The manager stared, rubbed his eyes, and laughed.</p>
			<p>“I reckon the game’s with you,” he said at last. “I climb down. This is sure a business proposition.”</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>The daily meeting of the heads of departments was held as usual in the Administration Headquarters at ten o’clock, with the Vice-President, the Mexican Rosas, in the chair. The members met in a large room on the same floor as the Gobernador’s private office, but at the side of the building away from the main street. The Vice-President said a word to his private secretary, who sat in a little office behind the chair, and when the meeting began the doors were quietly locked, so that the only entrance lay through the secretary’s room. There was a vast amount of detail on the agenda that morning, to which the meeting duly bent its mind.</p>
			<p>During the night there had been odd happenings at the railway-station. The daily freight train, which should have left at 9 <abbr>p.m.</abbr>, did not start; instead the freight train of the day before, which on its up-journey should have passed the other at the frontier station of Gabones, was ordered by telegraph to proceed without delay to the Gran Seco. Also the up-coming passenger train, which was not due to leave Santa Ana till noon, had been expedited, so that it arrived almost empty about daybreak, and intending travellers that day found themselves stranded at Santa Ana without a connection. The down-going train was due to leave at 10 <abbr>a.m.</abbr>, but it did not start. Those who meant to travel by it found the station closed and under guard, and the yards full of rolling stock. By 10 <abbr>a.m.</abbr> on that morning the whole of the rolling stock of the Gran Seco line, with the exception of a few trucks delayed at Santa Ana, was concentrated at the Gran Seco terminus.</p>
			<p>If the doings at the railway-station were curious, still more remarkable was what took place elsewhere in the city. In the area of the smelting and refining works there had been since the early morning a great peace. Walkers in the Avenida Bolivar suddenly awoke to the fact that the hum of industry, which day and night sounded like breakers on a beach, had ceased. The previous night had been a busy time for a certain section of the white employers, perhaps three-fourths of the total. They had begun by isolating the works area from the city and guarding the approaches. Then they had set about the compulsory conversion of the remaining fourth, a rapid business, and not unattended by violence. Three men attempted to break away, and were shot before they crossed the barrier. After that came the dealing with the Indian and mestizo labourers. Some were sent back to their pueblas under escort of a file of Mines Police, a few picked men were added to the white strength, but most remained in their compounds, which were put under guard. The furnaces were damped down, and by 6 <abbr>a.m.</abbr> the whole of the great works area was shuddering into quiet. The white employees, armed and disciplined, were waiting on the next stage.</p>
			<p>An hour later mutiny broke out in the barracks of the Town Police. It had been skilfully prepared, for many of the chief officers were implicated, and at first it moved swiftly and surely. The armoury was captured, those known to be recalcitrant were made prisoners in their beds, and in less than half an hour the mutineers held the barracks and had at any rate immobilised the opposition. But a certain part of the police was on duty in the city, and beside these was that special force, the Mines Bodyguard, which was responsible not to the Commissary of Police but directly to the Administration, and which was not concentrated in one place but scattered in many quarters.</p>
			<p>It was now that the ill-effect was felt of the failure to cut the line at the San Tomé Mine. For the manager of the San Tomé had rung up the Administration secretariat about eight o’clock, and, since he babbled of rebellion, had been put through to the officer in charge of the Bodyguard. This man, Kubek by name, had long been uneasy and alert⁠—indeed he had been the cause of the Gobernador’s suspicions. The appeal from San Tomé put him on his mettle, and he at once mobilised his force. He could rely on the fifty members of the Bodyguard who had not been tampered with, and, as soon as he found out what was happening at the barracks, he turned his attention to the members of the Town Police on outside duty. He informed the Administration of what was happening, a message received but not circulated by Señor Rosas’s private secretary.</p>
			<p>The consequence was that by 10 <abbr>a.m.</abbr> the situation was as follows: The works area was held by a force of foremen and engineers, who had cut it off from the city and were waiting for the arrival of the Mines Police. The Town Police were in the main on the side of the rebels and waited in barracks, but some of their members were with Kubek, who had about two hundred men under him and was holding what he regarded as the key positions⁠—a house at the corner of the Avenida Bolivar and the Calle of the Virgin, the Regina Hotel, and the house in the garden behind the Administration building which was the residence of the Vice-President. He believed that he had to deal only with the mutinous Town Police and with trouble at the Mines, and had no notion that the Mines Police were in the rising. The city as a whole knew nothing of what was happening. Promenaders in the Avenida Bolivar noted only the curious quiet and the absence of policemen on point duty.</p>
			<p>Meantime the meeting presided over by Señor Rosas pursued its decorous way. There were marketing reports from Europe which had to be discussed, and certain difficulties which had arisen with the shipping companies. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lariarty presented a report on the latter subject which required close consideration.</p>
			<p>At 11 <abbr>a.m.</abbr> the first contingent of the Mines Police under Peters arrived. They went straight to the works, where they found everything satisfactory, and gave directions to the forces assembled there. The latter had sent out scouts, who reported what had happened at the barracks of the Town Police. Peters was a cautious man, and, before effecting a junction, sent out patrols to discover if all was quiet in the city. His intention was to round up the Bodyguard man by man, for he knew all their lairs; but his patrols brought the disquieting news that the Bodyguard were forewarned and mobilised, and that they held the Regina Hotel and the corner house in the Calle of the Virgin. The third concentration, at the Vice-President’s residence, they had not discovered. Their news meant that the approaches to the Administration Building were blocked and must be cleared. Peters accordingly got in touch with the Town Police and made his plans.</p>
			<p>Just after noon, when the Board meeting had reached the question of a contract with Guggenheims, the noise of dropping fire began to be heard. A confused murmur penetrated too into the back chamber from the Avenida Bolivar. The Vice-President, who was frequently interrupted by the advent of his secretary with messages from the inner office, pushed his spectacles up on his brow and smiled benignly. “There’s a little trouble, gentlemen,” he observed. “Some foreign matter has gotten into our machine, and the police are digging it out.”</p>
			<p>Before 1 <abbr>p.m.</abbr> there was fighting at three points in the city, for the garrison in the Vice-President’s house had revealed itself by sniping one of Peters’s contingents. The Bodyguard were all desperadoes, and very quick with their guns, but they were hopelessly outnumbered, and, for the matter of that, outgeneralled. The Regina fell about 2.30, for it had not been difficult to force a way in from the back and take the defence in the rear. Nine of the defenders were killed, and the Police had seven dead and fifteen wounded. The house in the Calle of the Virgin resisted longer, for, being a corner house with fronts on two streets, it was less open to attack from behind. Yet that nest was smoked out before 4 <abbr>p.m.</abbr> and Peters could concentrate all his forces on the Vice-President’s residence.</p>
			<p>The Board meeting after three o’clock sat to a continuous accompaniment of rifle fire. But Señor Rosas with a Roman fortitude held the attention of his colleagues to the business of the agenda. The members seemed sunk in bewilderment, and it is difficult to believe that their minds worked competently on their business. The Vice-President did most of the talking. “It is all right, gentlemen,” he would say, on receiving a message from his secretary: “the Police are managing this little affair very well.”</p>
			<p>At half past five the last defences of the Bodyguard fell. It was a bloody business, for Kubek, who had learned the art of street-fighting in Eastern Europe, put up a stout resistance till he got a bullet in his windpipe. Peters ruefully calculated that that day the Police had over sixty men dead and nearly a hundred wounded, but he consoled himself with the reflection that the Bodyguard could not have a dozen survivors. He himself was bleeding from two wounds, but they must go untended, for he had still much to do. He hastened to confer with a slight youngish man, who wore civilian clothes⁠—an old tweed jacket and riding breeches of the English cut⁠—and who had joined him at the smelting works on his arrival that morning.</p>
			<p>About 6 <abbr>p.m.</abbr> the Vice-President at last brought the Board meeting to an end. His secretary had just handed him a written message which seemed to give him satisfaction.</p>
			<p>“Gentlemen,” he said, “our labours are over for the day. I thank you for the attention you have given to the Company’s business under somewhat trying conditions. And now, I judge, we are all going to have a bit of a holiday. I ought to tell you that important events have just taken place in this city, and our activities have got to close down for a spell. There has been a revolution, gentlemen. The workers of the Gran Seco have risen against the Government of Olifa, and they are counting on our President being their leader. I have no authority to speak for his Excellency, but I guess it’s more than likely that he will consent. What I have got to say is that you gentlemen are free to do what you please. You can’t oppose the revolution in this township, for it has already succeeded, but there’s no call for you to take a part in it unless you like. You can stay on here, and”⁠—here there was a significant pause⁠—“I will make it my business to see that your comforts are attended to.”</p>
			<p>The members, hypnotised by the long tension of the afternoon, stared blankly at the speaker. Then slowly life seemed to waken in their opaque eyes. The man called Lariarty became their spokesman. He rose and bowed to the chair.</p>
			<p>“I think we will go down to Olifa,” he said.</p>
			<p>At that moment there came the sound of explosions one after another in a chain, which set the windows rattling.</p>
			<p>The Vice-President shook his head.</p>
			<p>“I reckon that’s impossible, gentlemen. What you hear is the blowing up of the rolling stock at the railway-station. There will be no facilities for travel to Olifa, till Olifa makes them afresh.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
