<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-1" id="chapter-1-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
			<p>On the following evening Janet and Archie dined as Don Alejandro’s guests at the Club de Residentes Extranjeros. The club, situated in one of the squares to the north of the Avenida, was a proof of Olifa’s wealth and her cosmopolitanism. In the broad cool patio a fountain tinkled, and between it and the adjoining arcades tropical plants in green tubs made the air fragrant. The building was for the most part a copy of an old Spanish town house, but the billiard-room was panelled in oak with a Tudor ceiling, the card-room was Flemish, and the big dining-room Italian Renaissance. The night was freshly warm, with light airs stirring the oleanders, and, from the table which Don Alejandro had selected, the patio was a velvet dusk shot with gold and silver gleams like tiny searchlights.</p>
			<p>The only other guest was the American Consul. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Roderick Wilbur was a heavy man, with the smooth pale face of eupeptic but sedentary middle-age. His years in Olifa had not mellowed his dry, high-pitched New England voice, or endowed him with a single Latin grace. He looked upon the other diners with the disapproving air of a Scots elder of the kirk surveying a travelling theatrical company, and the humour which now and then entered his eye was like the frosty twinkle of a very distant star.</p>
			<p>Don Alejandro was in a vivacious mood. He was the showman of his beloved city, but he was no less a representative of his beloved Europe; he wished the strangers to praise Olifa but to recognise him as a cosmopolitan. Archie and Janet satisfied his patriotism, for, having hired a car that afternoon and driven round the city, they overflowed in admiration.</p>
			<p>“You were right,” Janet told him. “There is no mystery in Olifa. It is all as smooth and polished as a cabochon emerald, and, like a cabochon, you can’t see far inside it. Your people have the satisfied look of London suburbanites on a Sunday up the river.”</p>
			<p>“Your police are too good,” said Archie. “One doesn’t see a single ragamuffin in the main streets. Janet and I prefer the old quarter. Some day, Don Alejandro, we want you to take us round it and tell us who the people are. They look like samples of every South American brand since the Aztecs.”</p>
			<p>“The Aztecs lived in Mexico,” Janet corrected.</p>
			<p>“Well, I mean the chaps that were downed by the Conquistadors.”</p>
			<p>Don Alejandro laughed. “Our old quarter is only a tourist spectacle, like the native city in Tangier. For the true country life you must go to the estancias and the savannahs. I have arranged by telegraph for your visit to my cousin at Veiro.”</p>
			<p>“And the Gran Seco?”</p>
			<p>“That also is in train. But it is more difficult and will take time.”</p>
			<p>“I said there was no mystery in Olifa,” Janet observed, “but I rather think I was wrong. There is the Gran Seco. It seems to be as difficult to get into it as into a munition factory. Have you been there, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wilbur?”</p>
			<p>The American Consul had been devoting serious attention to his food, stopping now and then to regard Janet with benevolent attention.</p>
			<p>“Why, yes, Lady Roylance,” he said. “I’ve been up to the Gran Seco just the once since it blossomed out. I’ve no great call to go there, for Americans don’t frequent it to any considerable extent.”</p>
			<p>“Wilbur hates the place,” said Don Alejandro. “He thinks that every commercial undertaking on the globe should belong to his countrymen, and it vexes him that the Gran Seco capital should be European.”</p>
			<p>“Don’t you pay any attention to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Gedd,” said the big man placidly. “He’s always picking on my poor little country. But I can’t say I care for that salubrious plateau. I don’t like being shepherded at every turn as if I was a crook, and I reckon the Montana sagebrush is more picturesque. Also they haven’t much notion up there of laying out a township. They’d be the better of some honest-to-God Americans to look after the plumbing.”</p>
			<p>“See! He is all for standardising life. What a dull world the United States would make of it!”</p>
			<p>“That’s so. We prefer dullness to microbes. All the same, there’s things about the Gran Seco which you can see with half an eye aren’t right. I didn’t like the look of the miners. You never in your days saw such a hangdog, miserable bunch, just like some of our old Indian reservations, where big chief Wet Blanket and his wives used to drink themselves silly on cheap bourbon. And how in thunder does Castor get his labour? He’s got a mighty graft somewhere, but when I first came here the Gran Seco Indians were a difficult folk to drive. I’ve heard that in old times the Olifa Government had trouble with them over the conscription.”</p>
			<p>“They were savages,” said Don Alejandro, “and they are savages still. Castor has doubtless the art of dealing with them, for he himself is on the grand scale a savage.”</p>
			<p>Archie pricked up his ears.</p>
			<p>“Castor? Who is he?”</p>
			<p>“The <i xml:lang="es-ES">Gobernador</i> of the province. Also the President of the company.”</p>
			<p>“I saw a fellow coming out of the Gran Seco head office⁠—a fellow with a black beard, who didn’t look as if he missed much.”</p>
			<p>“That was Señor Castor. You are fortunate, Sir Archibald, for you, a new arrival, have already seen Olifa’s great man, and that is a privilege but rarely granted to us Oliferos. He descends upon us and vanishes as suddenly as a river mist.”</p>
			<p>“Tell me about him,” said Janet. “Where does he come from? What is his nationality?”</p>
			<p>Don Alejandro shook his head. “I do not know. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wilbur, who is a man of hasty judgments, will say that he is a Jew. He is certainly a European, but not a Spaniard, though he speaks our tongue. I can only say that he emerged out of nothing five years ago, and became at once a prince. He rules the Gran Seco, and its officials are altogether his creation. And since he rules the Gran Seco he rules Olifa. He has, as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wilbur would say, this country of mine by the short hairs.”</p>
			<p>“He don’t meddle with politics,” said the American, and Janet noticed that as he spoke he cast a quick glance around him, as if he did not wish to be overheard. Don Alejandro, too, had lowered his voice.</p>
			<p>“What nonsense!” said the latter. “He is money, and money is our politics today. Once we Latins of America were a great race. We were Europeans, with minds enlarged and spirits braced by a new continent. You are a soldier, Sir Archibald, and will remember that the bloodiest battles of last century were fought in La Plata and on the Uruguay. Our plains were the nursery of the liberties of Italy. But now we have but the one goddess. We are rich and nothing more. Soon we shall be richer, and then, my dear Wilbur, we shall be the devotees of your great country, which is the high-priest of riches.”</p>
			<p>“I can’t say that you’re showing any special devotion just at present,” said the other dryly. “My nationals⁠—thank God there aren’t many⁠—are about the most unpopular in this State. But quit talking about politics. We’re out to give you a good time, Lady Roylance, and we want to know just how you’d like us to set about it.”</p>
			<p>Janet was of a patient and philosophical temper, but Archie liked to take his sensations in gulps. So far Olifa, he admitted to himself, had been a little boring. The place, for all its beauty, had a deadly commonplaceness⁠—it was the typical bourgeois State, as Don Alejandro had declared the first night. And yet he was conscious that this judgment did not exhaust the matter. There were moments when he felt that Olifa was a strange woman in a mask of cheap silk, a volcano overspread with suburban gardens. Behind even the decorousness of the Avenida he savoured a mystery. Into the pleasant monotony of the days had come wafts of air from some other sphere⁠—a peasant’s face in the market, the bearded <i xml:lang="es-ES">Gobernador</i>, the pallid men in the hotel, even the preposterous figure of Dick Hannay’s former batman. These things had stirred in him an irrational interest.⁠ ⁠… Perhaps if he went into the hinterland he would find the glamour of Olifa, of whose existence he was convinced, but which had hitherto contrived to evade him.</p>
			<p>The club dining-room was full, and when they left it for coffee on the terrace beside the patio they had difficulty in finding chairs. It was apparently the practice to dine elsewhere and come to the club to dance, for a band was pounding out ragtime, and a dozen couples were on the floor.</p>
			<p>“The Moplahs,” Janet sighed happily.</p>
			<p>It was beyond doubt the American party from the yacht, and in that place they were as exotic as a tuberose in a bed of wallflowers. They had conformed to convention in their dress, for the four men wore dinner-jackets, and the four girls bright, short-skirted, silk-taffeta gowns and long pearl necklaces. Among the powdered Olifero ladies and the sallow Olifero cavaliers their fresh skins made a startling contrast, and not less startling were their shrill, toneless voices. They chattered incessantly, crying badinage to each other and to the band, as they danced the half-savage dances with an abandon which now suggested wild children and now the lunatic waltzing of hares in an April moonlight. Janet laughed aloud, the picture was so crazily fantastic. A Spanish girl, in a frock with wide flounces and with blue-black hair dressed high and surmounted by a gold comb, was suddenly cannoned into by a fluffy-headed minx, who apologised in a voice like a vindictive kitten’s, and was rewarded by a stony stare. Just so, Janet remembered, she had seen a greyhound repel the impudence of a Skye terrier.</p>
			<p>“I don’t see my tall girl,” she said.</p>
			<p>“The fellow with the starched linen knickerbockers isn’t here,” said Archie. “I didn’t see his face, but I think I would know him again. Who are they, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wilbur?”</p>
			<p>The American’s eyes were hard with disapproval. “I can’t tell you their names, but they’re off the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.boat">Corinna</i>. They’re in Burton Rawlinson’s party. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Rawlinson isn’t on board himself, and there can’t be much of a restraining hand to shepherd the bunch. Some of them have been to my office, and I judge I’m going to hear of trouble with them before they quit these shores. They want this city to stop still and take notice of them.”</p>
			<p>Archie inquired concerning <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Rawlinson.</p>
			<p>“He’s a fine man and a big man, one of the biggest on the Pacific coast. I’ve nothing against Burton. He’s rich, and he’s public-spirited, and he’s gotten a mighty fine collection of pictures. I can’t say I take to his offspring and their friends. There’s more dollars than sense in that outfit.”</p>
			<p>“I like the Moplahs,” said Janet. “I want to know them.”</p>
			<p>Archie, who was a connoisseur of dancing, observed that the men danced better than the women, a thing he had noticed before with Americans. “Did a fellow with starched linen bags ever come to your office?” he asked the Consul. “Slightly built fellow, a little shorter than me?”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wilbur shook his head. “Maybe, but I don’t remember him. All their garments struck me as curious. Heaven knows what’s going to become of our youth, Sir Archibald. They’ve quit behaving like ladies and gentlemen⁠—running wild like bronchos, and their parents can’t do the lassooing. They’re hard cases at seventeen.”</p>
			<p>“There’s an appalling innocence about them,” said Janet and looked up smiling, for two of the dancers had left the floor and were approaching them.</p>
			<p>The girl was small, and a little too plump, but very pretty, with a mop of golden curls like a medieval page’s. The young man was thin and beaky, and his longish hair was parted in the middle.</p>
			<p>“Say, what about dancing?” he said. “Won’t you cut in?” He looked at Janet, while the girl smiled pleasantly on Archie.</p>
			<p>“Most awfully sorry,” said Archie. “I’d love to, but I’ve got a game leg.”</p>
			<p>“Pardon?”</p>
			<p>“I mean I’m a bit lame.”</p>
			<p>Janet rose smiling and took the young man’s arm.</p>
			<p>“I don’t know your name,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wilbur, who was a stickler for the conventions, “but I reckon you’re with the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.boat">Corinna</i> party. This lady is Lady Roylance.”</p>
			<p>The youth regarded him solemnly. “You’ve said it, Grandpa,” was his reply. “Come on, lady.”</p>
			<p>The girl was still partnerless, and Don Alejandro offered himself for the breach. He sprang to his feet and bowed deeply from the waist. “If I may have the honour,” he said. Archie and the Consul were left alone to their cigars.</p>
			<p>The dancing-place was soon crowded, and Janet and Don Alejandro seemed to have been completely absorbed into the whirl. Glimpses could be caught of Janet’s porcelain elegance, and of an unwontedly energetic Don Alejandro in the grip of various corybantic maidens. The two men in the lounge-chairs presently ceased to be spectators and fell into talk.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wilbur, as if the absence of his colleague had unsealed his tongue, expanded and became almost confidential. He asked Archie for his impressions of Olifa, and when he was told “tidy and contented and opulent,” nodded an acquiescent head.</p>
			<p>“You’re about right, sir. That’s Olifa first and last⁠—the Olifa of today. Better policed than New York, and just about as clean as Philadelphia. Manicured, you might say. But it wasn’t always like that. When I first came here Olifa was the ordinary South American republic, always on the edge of bankruptcy and revolution, and this city had one of the worst names on the coast. The waterfront was a perfect rat-hole for every criminal in the Pacific⁠—every brand of roughneck and dope-smuggler and crook⁠—dagos with knives and niggers with razors and the scum of the U-nited States with guns. Today you could take your wife along it in perfect safety any hour of the night. The Treasury was empty, for politics were simply who could get their hands first and deepest into it. There was bad trouble upcountry, and there was always a war going on in the mountains, which the little underfed and never-paid soldiers couldn’t win. Now we’ve got a big balance in the budget and the peace of God over the land. It’s a kind of miracle. It’s almost against nature, Sir Archibald.”</p>
			<p>“Why, it’s principally the Gran Seco,” he continued, in response to Archie’s request for an explanation. “That, as you know, is the richest copper proposition on the globe, and the Government has a big share in it. There’s money to burn for everybody nowadays. But there’s more than money. Olifa’s gotten a first-class brain to help her along.”</p>
			<p>“The President?”</p>
			<p>Wilbur laughed.</p>
			<p>“The Excelentisimo is a worthy gentleman, and he has gotten some respectable folks to help him, but it isn’t the President of this republic that has made the desert blossom like the rose. There’s a bigger brain behind him.”</p>
			<p>“You mean the Gran Seco fellow⁠—what’s his name?”</p>
			<p>“I mean <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Castor. At least I reckon it must be <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Castor, for there isn’t anybody else. You see, I can size up the members of the Government, because I know them, so it must be the man I don’t know.”</p>
			<p>“I see. Well, it’s clear that I must get alongside of this Castor if I’m to learn much about Olifa. What’s the best way to work it?”</p>
			<p>“Through the President, I reckon. I’d like to help you, but I haven’t much of a pull in Olifa just at the moment. You see, the U-nited States is going through one of its periodical fits of unpopularity. Olifa has waxed fat, like the man in the Bible, and she’s kicking, and when a South American nation kicks it’s generally against the U-nited States. Don Alejandro will fix an interview with the President for you, and he’ll arrange your trip to the Gran Seco. He’s a good little man, though he don’t like my country.”</p>
			<p>Thereafter <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wilbur discoursed of his nation⁠—its strength and its weakness, its active intelligence, imperfect manners, and great heart. He was a critic, but he was also an enthusiast. To this man, grown old in foreign lands in his country’s service, America was still the America of his youth. Her recent developments he knew only from the newspapers, and he loyally strove to reconcile them with his old ideal. America only needed to be understood to be loved, but it was hard to get her true worth across the footlights. “You English,” he said, “have got a neat, hard-shell national character, with a high gloss on it. Foreigners may not like it, but they can’t mistake it. It hits them in the eye every time. But we’re young and growing and have a lot of loose edges, and it’s mighty hard to make people understand that often when we talk foolishness we mean wisdom, and that when we act high and mighty and rile our neighbours it’s because we’re that busy trying to get a deal through we haven’t time to think of susceptibilities. You’ve got to forget our untidy fringes.”</p>
			<p>“Like the crowd from the yacht,” said Archie. “They don’t rile me a bit, I assure you.⁠ ⁠… Just look at the way that lad dances. He might be David capering before the Lord.”</p>
			<p>“That’s because you’ve seen a lot of the world, Sir Archibald. I reckon you’ve met enough Americans to know the real thing.”</p>
			<p>“No, I’ve met very few. You see, I’ve never crossed the Atlantic before. But I knew one American, and for his sake I’m ready to back your country against all comers. He was about the wisest and bravest and kindest old fellow I ever came across.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wilbur asked his name.</p>
			<p>“He’s dead, poor chap. Died a few months ago. I daresay you’ve heard of him. His name was Blenkiron⁠—John <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> Blenkiron.”</p>
			<p>Archie had his eye on the Hebraic dancer or he might have noticed a sudden change in his companion’s face. When <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wilbur spoke again⁠—and that was after a considerable pause⁠—it was in a voice from which all feeling had gone, the voice in which he conducted his consular duties.</p>
			<p>“Yes. I’ve heard of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Blenkiron. Mighty fine man, they tell me. Just how well did you know him, Sir Archibald?”</p>
			<p>“I only saw him for a week or two in the Amiens business of March ’18. But they were pretty solemn weeks, and you get to know a man reasonably well if you’re fighting for your life beside him. He was with a great pal of mine, General Hannay, and the two of them put up a famous show at Gavrelle. I can see old Blenkiron’s face yet, getting cheerier the more things went to the devil, and fairly beaming when the ultimate hell was reached. I wouldn’t ask for a better partner in a scrap. I’m most awfully sorry he died. I always hoped to see him again.”</p>
			<p>“Too bad,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wilbur, and he seemed to be absorbed in some calculation, for his brows were knitted.</p>
			<p>A flushed Janet joined them, attended by two cavaliers who insisted on plundering the pot plants to give her flowers. Presently Don Alejandro also extricated himself from the dancers, with his black-corded eyeglass hanging over his left shoulder.</p>
			<p>“These innocents are going to the Gran Seco,” Janet announced. “They seem to think it is a sort of country club, but if your account is true, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wilbur, they’ll be like hummingbirds in a dustbin.”</p>
			<p>“They surely will,” said the Consul. “When do you expect your own permits, Lady Roylance?”</p>
			<p>“They should be ready tomorrow,” said Don Alejandro.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Archie and Janet left their caleche at the hotel gates, and walked up the steep avenue to enjoy the coolness of the night wind. At the esplanade on the top they halted to marvel at the view. Below them lay the old town with the cathedral towers white in the moonlight⁠—a blur of shadows in which things like glowworms twinkled at rare intervals, and from which came confused echoes of some secret nocturnal life. Beyond lay the shining belt of the Avenida, and the Ciudad Nueva mounting its little hills in concentric circles of light. On the other side the old harbour was starred with the riding lights of ships, and the lamps of the waterfront made a double line, reflection and reality. To the south at the new harbour there was a glow of fires and the clamour of an industry which did not cease at sunset. To the west, beyond the great breakwater, sea and sky melted under the moon into a pale infinity.</p>
			<p>Suddenly Archie’s spirits awoke. He seemed to see Olifa as what he had hoped⁠—not a decorous city of careerists, but a frontier post on the edge of mysteries. The unknown was there, crowding in upon the pert little pride of man. In the golden brume to the east were mountains⁠—he could almost see them⁠—running up to icefields and splintered pinnacles, and beyond them swamps and forests as little travelled as in the days of Cortes. Between the desert of the ocean and the desert of the hills lay this trivial slip of modernity, but a step would take him beyond it into an antique land. The whiff of a tropical blossom from the shrubberies and the faint odour of wood smoke unloosed a flood of memories⁠—hot days in the African bush, long marches in scented Kashmir glens, shivering camps on Himalayan spurs. The War had overlaid that first youth of his, when he had gone east to see the world, but the rapture and magic were now returning. He felt curiously expectant and happy.</p>
			<p>“I’ve a notion that we’re going to have the time of our lives here,” he told his wife.</p>
			<p>But Janet did not reply. For three days she had been busy chasing a clue through her memory and now she had grasped it. She had suddenly remembered who was the tall girl she had seen with the party from the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.boat">Corinna</i> on the day of their arrival.</p>
			<p>All night Archie dreamed of the Gran Seco. As he saw it, it was a desolate plateau culminating in a volcano. The volcano was erupting, and amid the smoke and fire a colossal human figure sat at its ease. Then the dream became a nightmare⁠—for the figure revealed itself as having the face and beard of the man he had seen leaving the office in the Avenida, but the starched white linen knickerbockers of the preposterous young American.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
