<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-2" id="chapter-2-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
			<p>Just about the hour of sunrise a girl sat perched on a rock from which the ground fell westward into an abyss of blue vapour. East of her, after a mile of park-like land, the steep woods rose black as coal, and above them soared into the central heavens a great mountain of rock and shale, which, so sheer was the face, showed even to a viewpoint so near its summit cone of snow. The face and the plateau were still dipped in shadow, but beyond the mountain the sun was up, and its first beams, flooding through a cleft on the north shoulder, made a pool of gold far out on the western sea. The peak was the great Choharua, which means, in the speech of the old races, the Mountain of the Two Winds, for it was held to be wind-shed as well as watershed.</p>
			<p>The tropic dawn broadened fast, though the sun did not show himself. Presently all the plateau to the east was washed in a pure, pale light. The place seemed to sparkle with a kind of hoarfrost, though the air was mild, and its undulations, and the shallow glen of the stream which descended from Choharua, were sharp-rimmed black shadows in that silver field. Then greenness broke through the monotint, like the flush of spring in an English wood, and what had been like a lunar landscape sprang suddenly into clean, thin colours. The far cone of snow became rosy-red and crystalline, so that for one moment, it hung like a translucent jewel in the sky. Then it solidified; the details of the shaly face sprang into hard reality; what had been unfeatured shadow showed now as sheer crag and intricate couloirs, specked with snowdrifts which were leaping waters. At last came the orb of the sun, first a crescent of red gold, and then by quick gradations a great burning archway in which the mountain seemed to be engulfed. The air changed to a glow of essential light, and in a moment it seemed that the faint scents of night became the warm spicy odours of day.</p>
			<p>The girl was looking to the sea. The line of light, which a minute before had been on the horizon, ran shoreward, as if a tide of sheer gold was flowing in from the west. But the ocean was some thousands of feet below, and the shore waters remained in dusk long after the morning had conquered the plateau. Below her the chasm of blue mist slowly became luminous, and features detached themselves, tall trees near at hand clinging to scarps, outjutting headlands of green far down. The noise of the falling stream grew louder, as if it had been asleep during the darkness and had only begun to talk with the morning. The immediate foreground cleared, and curious things were revealed. There were buildings on the edge of the chasm from which wire ropeways ran down into the brume, the kind of thing by which in Norway the saeter hay is moved to the valley, and by which in the War in the eyries of the Dolomites the Italian army provisioned its lookout posts and gun-stations. Also there were revealed the beginnings of a path which descended the ravine in spirals, and something else⁠—a framework of trestles and iron which decanted itself into the abyss like a gigantic chute. A stranger could now have made out the main features of the landscape⁠—a steep glen down which the torrent from Choharua made its way to the sea, a glen, not a cliff, a place by which it was possible to have access from the shore to the plateau. But that shore would not reveal itself. It lay far below in a broad ribbon of mist, flecked like a bird’s wing, which separated the molten gold of the sea from the gold-washed, recreated world of the morning hills.</p>
			<p>The girl rose from her perch and drew long breaths of the diamond air. The waxing light revealed her companion, a tall man muffled in a blanket coat, who had been standing beneath her. She turned to him. “It is well called the Courts of the Morning, Excellency,” she said. “Aren’t you glad I made you come with me?”</p>
			<p>He was busy lighting his pipe. When he raised his face to her, there was a flicker of a smile around the corners of his deep-set eyes.</p>
			<p>“I blame myself for not appreciating long ago the charms of this corner of my province. It is a place to intoxicate youth.”</p>
			<p>“And you?”</p>
			<p>“I am no longer young. To me it is a picturesque mantelpiece between the sierras and the sea. I observe “⁠—he nodded towards the ropeways and the trestles⁠—“I observe your communications. Ingenious!”</p>
			<p>“You may examine them at your leisure. We have no secrets from our leader.”</p>
			<p>“Your leader <i xml:lang="fr">malgré lui</i>. You foolish children are consistent in your folly. Tell me one thing, Miss Dasent. I am apparently at liberty. A charming young lady takes me out to admire the sunrise. Supposing I desire to leave⁠—desire it very badly. I am a busy man and my business will suffer from my absence.⁠ ⁠… Say that I am resolved to end this folly and at this moment. What would hinder me?”</p>
			<p>“Need you ask?” she said.</p>
			<p>“I ask,” he replied. Something minatory and grim had come into his face.</p>
			<p>“I should hinder you,” was her answer.</p>
			<p>He took a step towards her, while she watched him keenly. As his foot was raised for a second step, she blew a small whistle, and he halted. Out of the rocks and bushes men had appeared by magic, lean Indian faces with their eyes fixed on the girl. She looked at her companion, and he smiled. Then she waved her hand and the faces disappeared.</p>
			<p>“I thought as much,” he said. “As I said, you are consistent in your folly.” The momentary animation had gone out of his face, and left it placid, set, and inscrutable. He did not move when out of the chasm two figures emerged, so quietly that even the girl, who had been expecting them, started as their steps rang on the stony platform. They were young men, apparently much of an age, but very different in build. One was tall and burly, with an untidy head of tow-coloured hair and a face so rugged that the features might have been rough-hewn with an axe out of some pale wood. It would have made an excellent figurehead for an old China clipper. He wore a khaki shirt, khaki shorts, and football stockings, but there was something about him that smacked of the sea. His companion, who wore similar clothes, was slight and beaky, with a mop of longish dark hair. They were about to cry some greeting to the girl when they caught sight of her companion, and both stiffened, like men who had been trained, in the presence of a superior.</p>
			<p>“Excellency, may I present to you two members of your staff?” she said. “This”⁠—indicating the tall man⁠—“is Lieutenant Roger Grayne, a naval officer.⁠ ⁠… This is Captain Bobby Latimer. You are not interested in these things, I know, Excellency, but Captain Latimer has quite a reputation in our Air Force.”</p>
			<p>The bareheaded young men saluted. “Pardon our rig, sir,” said Grayne, “but we’ve been up all night. We’re rather in want of a bath and breakfast. We’ve just been saying goodbye to the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.boat">Corinna</i>.”</p>
			<p>“Ah! Your line of communications?”</p>
			<p>“One of them,” said the girl, smiling.</p>
			<p>“I venture to remind you,” said the older man, “that the republic of Olifa possesses a navy.”</p>
			<p>The sailor laughed. “Not a very good one, sir. A trifle short in small craft and a whole lot short in practice. Olifa has never had much coast-patrol work to do, and she is mighty ignorant of this northern shore. I’d like to take you down below there and show you the landing. It’s as cunningly tucked away as the ports the old-time buccaneers used to have among the Florida keys. It would take pretty bright men some months to hit it off.”</p>
			<p>“But supposing they were fortunate? What then?”</p>
			<p>“Why then, sir, they could make it difficult for the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.boat">Corinna</i> and certain other craft, but they couldn’t put any considerable spoke in our business.”</p>
			<p>“What would prevent them fighting their way up and cornering you like rats on this shelf?”</p>
			<p>“Ye‑es,” was the answer. “They might⁠—with Heaven’s own luck and plenty of time and no sort of regard for casualties. That four thousand feet of gully is a mighty difficult ladder to climb, and every rung has its nasty catch. I’m not worrying about our little backdoor to the sea. Come here, sir, and have a look down. The mist will be gone by now.”</p>
			<p>The Gobernador allowed himself to be led to a little platform of rock which projected above the gulf. On his arrival he had made the ascent in a thick fog, and had had no chance of noting the details. Now he saw that the path dropped at once into thick bush, while the trestles zigzagged till they were lost behind a spur of rock. Only the wireways ran straight in a dizzy angle till far below they seemed to terminate in a dull blur on the water’s edge. But what he chiefly observed was that the shore made a little bay, which ran south and was sheltered from the ocean by a green conical spur. To a ship at sea that bay was securely hidden, and the ravine must appear as one of a hundred others on the scarred and wooded mountain face. There would be some intricate prospecting before it was discovered.</p>
			<p>He turned to the others with a shrug of his shoulders. “I think I have had enough of the picturesque. What about breakfast?”</p>
			<p>A path led them into the shallow trough of the plateau, where the stream from Choharua wound among lawns and thickets in shining links like a salmon-river. They crossed it by a rough bridge of planks, and then the land lifted gently under the shadow of the mountain, while the shelf broadened as it turned the southern skirts. Presently it flattened out to a miniature plain, and they came suddenly into an area of crowded life. It looked like a cantonment. Round a block of wooden huts lay a ring of tents, from which rose the smoke of morning fires. On the left there were horse-lines, and beyond them the tall masts of a wireless station. On the right were what looked like aeroplane hangars. A busy hum came from the place, and that mingled smell of wood-smoke, horses, and cooking food which since the beginning of time has been a mark of human concourse.</p>
			<p>The western ocean was hidden by the lift of the shore scarp, but since the coast recessed at this point there was a gleam of water from the south. To the southeast lay the great wall of the sierras, but as it bent inland the land in front seemed to sink in craggy and forested foothills, giving the eyes a great prospect towards what seemed a second and lower plateau. The air was filled with an exquisite morning freshness, half of the sea and half of the hills, and the place seemed part eyrie, part sanctuary⁠—an observation point over the kingdoms of the world, and also a tiny sheltered kingdom, brooded over by virgin peaks and guarded by untravelled seas.</p>
			<p>The four stopped before one of the larger tents. A little way off a small party of Indians were off-saddling weary horses. The girl pointed to them.</p>
			<p>“See, Excellency,” she said. “Another of our lines of communication.”</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>An hour later a small company assembled for breakfast in the staff mess-hut. Janet Roylance was dispensing coffee to half a dozen young men in breeches and linen jackets, one of whom was her husband, while Barbara Dasent at the other end of the table was slicing a cold ham. The men rose as the Gobernador entered, and Janet pointed to a vacant chair beside her.</p>
			<p>“Where is Sandy?” she asked. “Archie saw him an hour ago, and he said he was hungry enough to eat an ox.”</p>
			<p>“He is getting clean,” said Archie. “He looks as if he had been having a dusty time. He likes tea, Janet.”</p>
			<p>“I know. I’ve got it for him. And Sobranye cigarettes in a china box. I remembered his tastes.”</p>
			<p>To a stranger there would have appeared to be no formality or restraint about the little party. It might have been a company of friends breakfasting at some country farm. The Gobernador made a hearty meal, and his watchful eyes seemed almost benevolent when they rested on Janet or Barbara. There was no reference to the hive of strange activities around them. The young Americans were recondite travellers and talked at large of odd places and odd friends. One of them, Eborall by name, whom the others called Jim, had been with Roosevelt on his Amazon expedition and had something to say of the uneasy life of the Brazilian forests. “We never struck a health-resort like this,” he said. “They don’t keep them on the east side of the Andes.” Grayne, who was something of a naturalist, had a discussion with Archie Roylance about a type of short-winged buzzard that he had seen that morning. The young men spoke deferentially, with an eye on the Gobernador, like subalterns breakfasting with their commanding officer. Janet chattered eagerly in her role of the untravelled, to whom every new thing was a marvel. Only Barbara was a little silent. Her eyes were always turning to the door.</p>
			<p>Presently it opened and a man entered. At first glance he seemed about the same age as the others, for a fine-drawn face often acquires an absurd youthfulness when, after some days of indoor life, it is first exposed to the weather. The tiny wrinkles around his eyes did not show under the flush of sunburn. He entered like a guest who, having arrived late at a country-house, makes his first appearance at breakfast and knows that he will find friends.</p>
			<p>“Sandy, at last!” Janet cried. All rose, and the young Americans turned curious eyes on the newcomer, as on someone who had been eagerly awaited.</p>
			<p>“There’s a chair next to Barbara,” Janet said. “Excellency, I don’t think you have met Lord Clanroyden.”</p>
			<p>The two men bowed, but the newcomer did not offer to shake hands. They smiled on each other with conventional politeness, but the eyes of the elder man dwelt longer on the newcomer’s face.</p>
			<p>“What’s the news?” Janet asked with a casualness that was obviously assumed.</p>
			<p>“None at present, except that everything goes well. I must feed first, for my last bite was fifteen hours ago. After that I’m going to turn in and sleep a round of the clock.⁠ ⁠… How jolly it is to be up on this shelf again! I feel a new man already.”</p>
			<p>Sandy fell heartily on his food. “China tea,” he murmured. “Janet, you saint! I haven’t tasted it for weeks.”</p>
			<p>But the pleasant informality had deserted the company. Archie looked heavy with unspoken questions. The young Americans fell silent and kept their eyes furtively on Sandy, as if they were trying to harmonise a preconceived figure of their imagination with this ravenous reality. Janet rose. “I don’t see why we should behave as if we were at the Zoo, and watching the animals feed. Your cigarettes are over there, Sandy. We’ll leave you to finish your breakfast in peace.”</p>
			<p>But the Gobernador did not leave the room with the others. He filled his pipe and pushed the Sobranye cigarettes towards Sandy’s plate. The latter, having finished the marmalade stage, began to peel an apple. “Please smoke,” he said. “I’ll join you in a second.”</p>
			<p>Presently he swung himself round to face the other, and lit a cigarette. His face had lost the careless youthfulness which it had borne when he first arrived. It was the face of an older and a different man, hard, fine, and alert, and his eyes were as wary as the Gobernador’s. They seemed to be inviting a challenge.</p>
			<p>The latter spoke first.</p>
			<p>“I think you owe me an explanation, Lord Clanroyden,” he said. The tones of his voice were perfectly quiet and assured. The question seemed to spring not from anxiety but from a polite curiosity.</p>
			<p>“I owe you many, but they will have to come bit by bit. Meanwhile I can give you news. The night before last we occupied without serious trouble the city of the Gran Seco. At this moment I think I can fairly say that the whole province is in our hands.”</p>
			<p>“We! Our! What precisely do you mean?” There was an edge in the voice which proved that its possessor had been startled.</p>
			<p>“It is a long story. But the name which the newspaper-readers of the world are associating with the revolt against the Olifa Government is your own, Excellency. You were the creator of the Gran Seco, and you are going to be its liberator.”</p>
			<p>“Liberator? From what? Am I to destroy my own creation?”</p>
			<p>“The copper industry will not suffer. The Vice-President of the Company will see to that. There will only be a suspension of business⁠—how long will depend upon the Olifa Government.”</p>
			<p>“Rosas? He is in this fool conspiracy?”</p>
			<p>“Undoubtedly. You may call him the prime mover. You know him as Rosas the Mexican, but to his friends he is John Scantlebury Blenkiron⁠—a patriotic citizen of the United States⁠—”</p>
			<p>The other cried out. “Blenkiron! But he is dead!”</p>
			<p>“Only officially. He is an ancient friend of mine, and it is our good fortune, Excellency, that your paths never crossed till he joined you eighteen months ago. You need not blame your Intelligence service. Blenkiron has puzzled before this the most efficient Intelligence services. He had been watching your doings for some time, and when he put his remarkable talents at your service it was with a purpose. The first part of that purpose has now been accomplished.”</p>
			<p>Sandy paused.</p>
			<p>“Go on,” said the other. “I am deeply interested.”</p>
			<p>Sandy laughed. “We have no secrets from our commander-in-chief. But why should I waste time telling you what you know already?”</p>
			<p>“I am not sure that I do know. This purpose? You do not want to cripple a great industry? You have no special grievance, I take it, against the republic of Olifa? You are not fanatics about forms of government? Am I to take it that your efforts are directed principally against me?”</p>
			<p>“You may put it that way if you like. But we have no personal animus against your Excellency. Blenkiron, who has worked with you for nearly two years, rather likes you. We are all prepared to give you devoted allegiance.”</p>
			<p>“Provided I do what you want?”</p>
			<p>“Provided you do what we want. We are anxious to prevent you making a fool of yourself.”</p>
			<p>It was the elder man’s turn to laugh. “I suppose I should be grateful, and I am certainly flattered. But I should like to know just what you consider my capacities in the way of folly.”</p>
			<p>“I hate to repeat platitudes,” said Sandy, “but, since you insist, you shall have them. You have created a great industry, but you are following what seems to us an unbusinesslike line. You are using up your human material too rapidly. I put aside the moral question, and ask you simply if that is good business. Of course it isn’t, and since you do not do things without a purpose we had to discover that purpose. Well, we know perfectly well what it is. You are trying to make bad trouble in a world which has already too much trouble. We do you the justice to admit that this is not blind malevolence. You have an ideal behind you, a philosophy, a very serious philosophy. Well, to be frank, we don’t like your methods, and we don’t like your purpose, and we hate your philosophy like hell. Do we understand each other?”</p>
			<p>The Gobernador shook out the ashes from his pipe. His eyes, under his level brows, looked steadily on his companion. There was now no smile on his face, and in his gaze there was a serious perplexity.</p>
			<p>“Lord Clanroyden,” he said, “I have known about you for some years⁠—under your old name. I have even made it my business to keep in touch with you through my informants. I have always regarded you as a person of quite exceptional intelligence. There have been times when I considered you one of the two or three most intelligent people in the world.⁠ ⁠… I confess that I am grievously disappointed.”</p>
			<p>“No wonder,” said Sandy. “I have always been a bit of an ass.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t complain that our aims differ. Your reputation was never that of a thinker. But you were reported to me as a practical man, uncommonly audacious, resourceful, and farsighted. Now I find that you are audacious⁠—but with the audacity of a crude boy. You have organised a childish little piece of banditry. You think you have fathomed my methods. Why, man, you have not learned the alphabet of them. I have my lines down deep in every country on the globe. The Gran Seco has purchase with every Government. As soon as the news of your doings has gone abroad, you will have the most potent forces set at work to defeat you. The prosperity of the Gran Seco is of vital importance to millions up and down the world. The credit of Governments, the interests of a thousand financial groups are involved. The very people who might otherwise sympathise with you will be forced to combine to break you.”</p>
			<p>“True,” said Sandy. “But you realise that your name as our leader will cramp the style of your supporters.”</p>
			<p>“Only for a moment. It will not be believed⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“I am not so sure. Remember, you are a mystery man, Excellency, whom the world has heard of, but does not know. You have been playing a pretty game with the press, but we too have made our plans. The newspapers by this time will be full of character-studies of the Gobernador of the Gran Seco, arranged for by us. In spite of yourself, you are going to get the reputation of a high-souled humanitarian, a cross between Bolivar and Abraham Lincoln. I think we shall get in first with our picture, and⁠—well, you know what the public is. It will be difficult to efface first impressions, and that, I say, will cramp the style of your people and give us time.”</p>
			<p>“But what earthly good will time do you? That is my second charge against your intelligence. You have chosen to fight me with weapons so infantile that they will break in a week.⁠ ⁠… What were you and Blenkiron thinking of to put your eggs in this preposterous basket? I have many vulnerable points. <em>I</em> know that, if you do not. You and your friends might have slowly organised the collective stupidity of the world against me. You had your fulcrum in America, and for lever you had all the crude sentimentality of mankind. I have always feared such a crusade. Why did you not attempt it?”</p>
			<p>“I will tell you why,” was the answer. “It was because we respected you too sincerely. We knew that we couldn’t beat you at that game. To fight you in parliaments, and cabinet councils, and on the stock exchanges and in the press would have been to fight you on your own chosen ground. We preferred to fight you on <em>our</em> ground. We decided to transfer the whole contest to a sphere in which your genius was not at home. You are the last word in civilisation, Excellency, and you can only be beaten by getting you into the ancient and elementary world where civilisation does not apply.”</p>
			<p>The other did not answer for a moment. Something in the words seemed to have started a new train of thought, and his eyes took on a profound abstraction. Then he leaned forward.</p>
			<p>“There is method in that,” he said. “I do not quarrel with your policy. But, in the name of all that is rational, where are your weapons? A handful of children, a disloyal colleague who has no doubt worked upon the turbulent element among our white employees, my kidnapping, and the fact that my administration was a somewhat personal matter⁠—these may give you control of the Gran Seco for a day or two. But what then? There are the wealth and the army of Olifa to crush you like a nut on an anvil.”</p>
			<p>“Not quite so bad. You underestimate Blenkiron, I think. Remember he has been in the Gran Seco for some time, and he has not been idle. We have the Mines Police, and most of the Mines foremen and engineers. When I left yesterday, the place was as docile as a girls’ school, and there was a very stout heart in our troops.”</p>
			<p>“Troops!” the other said. “You may have got your noncommissioned officers, but where can you get the rank-and-file for an army?”</p>
			<p>“Where you got your labour, Excellency. Among the old masters of the country. You must have heard of the trouble that the Gran Seco Indians used to give to Olifa. They were never properly conquered till you came along. You policed them and dragooned them, but the dragoons are now on their side. A couple of years more and you would have drained the manhood from them and left them mere shells of men. But at present they are still a people, and a fighting people, and they are going to fight for liberty and vengeance. Not against you⁠—they regard you as their saviour, and are wearing your medals round their necks⁠—but against the oppressors of Olifa.⁠ ⁠… I think you lived too much of a sedentary life, Excellency. You took the word of your subordinates too much on trust. If you had lived as I have among the pueblas, you would have been a little afraid of what you found there.⁠ ⁠… Perhaps a little shocked, too.⁠ ⁠… Those rags and tatters of men, used up in the mines and flung on the dustheap! The remnant of manhood left in them is not a gentle thing.”</p>
			<p>“But against the army of Olifa! I have made it my business to see that that army is the most efficient for its size in the world. What can your savages and your gunmen do against the last word of science from the laboratory and the factory?”</p>
			<p>“Nothing if we fight them in their own way. A good deal, I think, if we fight them in ours. We refuse to meet you on your own ground, Excellency, and you may be certain that we don’t mean to meet the Olifa army on theirs.”</p>
			<p>“I cannot follow your riddles.”</p>
			<p>“Of course you can’t. This is a very academic discussion we’re having. If you’ll allow me, I’ll explain to you later the general layout. You’re entitled to have everything shown you. It will interest you, as a thinker, for, though you’ll scarcely believe it, we too have our philosophy of life. You are a very wise man, with a large experience of the world, but I believe we can show you something which you know nothing about.”</p>
			<p>The other was listening intently. “This wonderful revelation?” he asked. “What is it?”</p>
			<p>“The meaning of youth,” was the answer. “You have lived all your life in an elderly world, Excellency. Everything worked by rule, and even your lawlessness was nicely calculated. And all the old stagnant things were your puppets which you could move as you pleased. But there’s another side of which you know nothing at all. You have your science; well, it will be matched against hope and faith and the simplicity that takes chances. We may go down, but we’ll go down cheerfully, and, if we win, by God, we’ll make you a new man.”</p>
			<p>A strange look came into the other’s face. He regarded Sandy with a bewilderment in his stern eyes which seemed not altogether unfriendly.</p>
			<p>“I cannot quite understand,” he said, as he rose, “why you and your friends did not take the simple course. Since your quarrel is principally with me, a bullet in my head strikes me as the most satisfactory solution.”</p>
			<p>Sandy stood before him, a head shorter, a stone or two lighter, looking at the moment half his age. There was a dancing light in his eyes which answered the flickering spark in the other’s. He laid a hand on the Gobernador’s sleeve, as if the great man were a coeval.</p>
			<p>“Nonsense!” he said. “We leave murder to your Conquistadors. We think so highly of you that we’re going to have a try at saving your soul.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
