<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>X</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-2" id="chapter-2-10" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</h3>
			<p>Archie took a good quarter of an hour to disentangle himself from his Absalom-like posture, since, owing to the constriction of his garments, he could not get at his knife, and his hands were numb with cold. When at last he was free, he pitched forward stiffly into a huge tree-fern, which kept him from rolling down the slope. The actual forest was thin, but the undergrowth was dense and waterlogged, and the declivity so steep that every step must be watched. The fog was still there, but it was not thick, and a faint light filtered through it, so that it was possible to see the ground beneath and the trees above in a dim monotint.</p>
			<p>His first business must be to find Geordie Hamilton. He shouted, but it was like speaking with the mouth muffled by folds of blanket. He argued that Hamilton must have descended not more than two hundred yards below him, and that the plane when he left it had been directly ascending the mountain face, so he tried to shape a straight course downhill. But the going was appalling. There were thickets of cactus to be circumvented, an occasional tall tree choked with creepers, and strips of sheer red earth. He stopped every few yards to shout for his companion, but no answer came; it seemed impossible to pierce that deathly stillness. Presently he realised that at this rate he would soon be lost. He halted and mopped his brow, for he was sweating under the burden of his heavy flying-clothes. And then he heard, apparently from the bowels of the earth, what seemed to be a groan.</p>
			<p>“Hamilton,” he cried, and, shouting his name, he made his way a little to the left.</p>
			<p>At last a reply came, a miserable, muffled voice.</p>
			<p>“Is’t you, Sir Erchibald?” it said, and it was as if its owner were speaking from under deep water.</p>
			<p>The place was a shallow ravine, and as Archie groped his way something very hard and sharp caught him in the neck.</p>
			<p>“Hamilton, where on earth are you?” he cried in pain.</p>
			<p>“I’m catched in a buss,” came an answering groan. “For God’s sake get me out, for I’ve gotten some awfu’ jags.”</p>
			<p>Then Archie remembered his spotlight. It revealed a great clump of the aloe called <i xml:lang="es">caraguatá</i>, with Hamilton most intricately wedged among the sword-like leaves. Above the spikes, like a dissolute umbrella, waved the parachute. Hamilton hung face downward, his greatcoat suspended above him and his legs splayed like a clumsy diver’s. He had ceased to struggle, for every movement sent the thorns deeper into his tenderest parts.</p>
			<p>Archie stripped to shirt and breeches, and set himself slowly to cut the victim out, but it was the better part of an hour before the work was done, and Hamilton, still apoplectic about the face, was cautiously examining his wounds. He had plenty of them, but only scratches, though he declared that his legs were so stiff that it would be a month before he could walk.</p>
			<p>“You’ll have to start right away,” Archie told him. “We can’t stay in this blasted hothouse. We must be pretty near the edge of the tree-line, and once we get above the forest we can find a place to sleep. So step out, my lad, game leg or no. You and I are about equal now.”</p>
			<p>Slowly and with many stumbles they began the ascent, guiding themselves by the lift of the ground. It was desperately laborious, for sometimes the way was up sheer banks of earth, the remains of old landslides, and as slippery as oil; sometimes through acres of great ferns where the feet sank into deep hollows among the roots: sometimes through cactus scrub which reduced their coat-skirts to rags; often through horrible oozing moss which sent up a stink like a charnel-house. The fog was dying away, and the rising moon made their immediate environment clear, but the better they could see the more hopeless the toil became. Hamilton panted and sobbed, and Archie’s weak leg gave him many falls. The air had none of the wholesome chill of night. A damp heat closed them in, and when now and then a faint waft came up from the valley beneath it seemed to have a sickening scent of violets.</p>
			<p>Often they stopped for breath, but they did not lie down. Instinctively they both shrank from contact with that unhallowed soil. Once Hamilton drank from a pool in a stream, and was violently sick.</p>
			<p>“We must be about the height of the Matterhorn,” Archie said, “and yet it’s as hot as hell. This is a cursed place.”</p>
			<p>“ ’Deed, it’s no canny,” said Hamilton, gulping with nausea.</p>
			<p>Before long it was clear that Hamilton’s strength was giving out. Thickset and burly as he was, this greenhouse-mountaineering was beyond him. He stumbled more often, and after each fall took longer to recover. At last he stopped.</p>
			<p>“I doot I’m done, sir,” he wheezed. “This bloody cemetery is ower much for me! You gang on.”</p>
			<p>“Nonsense,” said Archie, taking his arm. He was dog-tired himself, but to his more sensitive nerves the hatred of the place was such that it goaded him forward like a spur. “See, we’ll take hands. We can’t be far from the tree-line.”</p>
			<p>But it seemed hours before they reached it. Fortunately the slope had become easier and less encumbered, but the two men staggered on drunkenly, speaking no word, their eyes scarcely seeing, so that their falls were frequent, everything blotted from their mind but the will to bodily endurance. So blind were they that they did not notice that the fog was almost gone, and they had come out of the forest before they realised it. Suddenly Archie was aware that he was no longer climbing steeply, and then he was looking across a shelf of bare land which rose to a rim of a pale silver. He was breathing free air, too. A cool light wind was on his forehead.</p>
			<p>“Hamilton,” he cried, “I⁠ ⁠… believe⁠ ⁠… we’re clear.”</p>
			<p>The two dropped like logs, and the earth they sank on was not the reeking soil of the forest, but the gravel of an upland.</p>
			<p>Both lay for a little, their limbs too weary to stretch. Then Archie crawled to his feet.</p>
			<p>“Let’s go on a bit. I want to feel really quit of that damned Poison Valley. We must find a hole to sleep in.”</p>
			<p>They staggered on for another half-mile, weakly, but no longer so miserably. The sand and shale underfoot gleamed white as salt in the moonlight, and were broken only by boulders and small scrubby thorns. Then they found a shelf of rock which overhung so as to form a shallow cave. It was now as cold as it had been hot in the covert, the sweat had dried upon them, and the scratches on hands and face smarted in the frost. Each had a small ration of food in his pocket, charqui⁠—which is the biltong the Gran Seco Indians prepare⁠—some biscuits and chocolate, and Archie had a packet of raisins. They supped lightly, for thirst and hunger seemed to have left them, and, cuddled against each other for warmth, both were soon asleep.</p>
			<p>Archie woke in an hour’s time. He had slept scarcely at all during the past three days, and even deep bodily fatigue could not drug his mind. Wild dreams had assailed him⁠—of falling down precipices of red earth into a foetid jungle threaded by oily streams. He woke to find that the moon had set and that it was very dark. Far off there was a call like a jackal barking. There were other things alive on this shelf beside themselves.</p>
			<p>Then he heard a sound close at hand⁠—the padding of soft feet on gravel. His spotlight was beside him, and he flashed it in the direction of the feet. About ten yards away stood an animal. At first he thought it was a wolf from its size, till he saw its sharp muzzle and prick ears, its reddish fur, and its thick tail. It was a fox, one of the cannibal foxes of the País de Venenos that he had heard of from Sandy. The animal blinked in the light, and its teeth were bared in a snarl. Archie reached for Hamilton’s rifle, which lay loaded beside them, but he was too late. The great brute turned and trotted off, and passed out of sight among the boulders.</p>
			<p>“Enough to put me off foxhunting for evermore,” thought Archie. After that he did not sleep, but lay watching the dark thin to shadows and the shadows lighten to dawn. The sun seemed to leap with a bound over the far Cordilleras, and a morning mist, as white and flat as a snowfield, filled the valleys. Archie’s heartsickness returned to him like a fever. Somewhere within the horizon was Janet, but by what freak of fortune was he to get her⁠—himself a mere lost atom at the edge of his endurance, and as ignorant as a babe of this immense, uncharted, unholy world?</p>
			<p>Both men soon realised that the País de Venenos had exacted its penalty. Hamilton was clearly in a fever, which may have been due to his many cuts, and Archie felt something like a band of hot steel round his head. For breakfast they nibbled a little chocolate and ate a few raisins. Then, as far as their bodily discomfort permitted, they discussed their plans.</p>
			<p>“We’re up against some solid facts, Hamilton,” said Archie. “We’re looking for my wife, and I believe she’s somewhere within fifty miles, but we’ve got to admit that we’re lost ourselves. All I remember from Lord Clanroyden’s map is that if we keep going up the south wall of the Poison Country we’ll come to the main range, and southwest of that lies Pacheco. The people we’re seeking must be up on the range, but they may be north or south of the Poison Country. We couldn’t cross that infernal valley, so let’s hope they are on the south. Another thing⁠—we mayn’t be able to get up the range⁠—we’re neither of us in much form for mountaineering. Also, we’ve got about enough food to last us with care for two days. We shan’t want for water.”</p>
			<p>“I’ll no need much meat,” said Hamilton sombrely. “I couldna swallow my breakfast, my throat’s that sair.”</p>
			<p>“We’re both dashed ill,” Archie agreed. “I feel like a worm, and you look like one. Maybe we’ll be better if we go higher.”</p>
			<p>Hamilton turned a feverish eye upwards. “I doot it’s higher we’ll be goin’. Anither kind o’ Flyin’ Corps. Angels.”</p>
			<p>“That’s as it may be. It’s too soon to chuck in our hand.⁠ ⁠… You and I have been in as ugly places before this. We’re both going on looking for my wife till we drop. We’ll trust to the standing luck of the British Army. I’ve a sort of notion we’ll find something.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“We’ll maybe find mair folk than we can manage.”</p>
			<p>“Undoubtedly. If we’re lucky enough to get that far, we’ll have to go very warily. We needn’t make plans till we see what turns up. At the worst we can put up a fight.”</p>
			<p>Hamilton nodded, as if the thought comforted him. A fight with men against odds was the one prospect which held no terrors for him.</p>
			<p>The two very slowly and painfully began their march over the shelf and up to the snow-rimmed slopes which contained it. The País de Venenos behind them was still a solid floor of mist. Happily the going was good⁠—flat reefs of rock with between them long stretches of gravelly sand. Archie decided that he must bear a little to his right, for there the containing wall seemed to be indented by a pass. They must find the easiest road, for they were in no condition to ascend steep rock or snow. The wind was from the east and wisps of cloud drifted towards them, bringing each a light flurry of snowflakes. They had awoken shivering, and now as they walked their teeth chattered, for both were too sore and stiff to go fast enough to warm their blood.</p>
			<p>Suddenly they struck a path⁠—a real path, not an animal’s track, but a road used regularly by human feet. Indeed, it seemed at one time to have been almost a highway. At one place Archie could have sworn that the rock had been quarried to ease the gradient, and at another, where it flanked a stream, it looked as if it had been embanked. In that wild place it seemed a miracle. Archie thought that he must be lightheaded, so he examined carefully the workmanship. There could be no doubt about it, for his fingers traced the outlines of squared stones. Once this had been a great highroad, as solid as Roman work. It seemed to come out of the mist of the Poison Valley, and to run straight towards the pass in the ridge.</p>
			<p>He pointed it out to Hamilton.</p>
			<p>“Aye, there’s been folk here langsyne,” was the answer.</p>
			<p>Archie bent over a patch of snow. “Not so long ago. Here are the marks of feet, naked feet, and they were made within the past twenty-four hours.”</p>
			<p>Slowly they tramped up the glacis of the range towards the pass. Hamilton walked like a man in a dream, stumbling often, and talking to himself. He seemed to have a headache, for he stopped at the water-pools to bathe his head. The pain in Archie’s forehead grew worse as they ascended, till it became almost unbearable. He kept his fingers on his eyes to ease the throbbing behind them. But his mind was clear, and he could reason with himself about his condition. It might be the poisoning of the forest⁠—most likely that was true in Hamilton’s case⁠—or it might be mountain sickness. He had once had a slight bout in the Karakoram, and he had heard that it was common in the Cordilleras.⁠ ⁠… Just before the summit of the pass he looked back. The tablecloth was lifting from the País de Venenos, and the white floor was now cleft with olive-green gashes.</p>
			<p>The summit of the pass was a hollow between snowdrifts. There both men stood and stared, for the sight before them was strange and beautiful. Archie had expected another tableland, or a valley of rocks shut in between peaks. Instead his eyes looked over a wide hollow, some three miles in diameter. High ridges flanked it on all sides, and on the west was a great mass of mountain, which he believed must project like a promontory towards the Tierra Caliente. The slopes beneath them were at first boulders and shingle, but presently they became the ordinary grassy savannah, with clumps of wood here and there which seemed to be more than scrub. And in the centre of the hollow lay a lake, shaped like a scimitar, of the profoundest turquoise blue.</p>
			<p>He unslung his field-glasses and examined the place. There was no sign of life in it. At various points on the shore he could detect what looked like millet fields, but there was no mark of human habitation. Then he examined a dark blur near the western end, and found something that might have been the ruins of a Border keep.</p>
			<p>“We’ve struck a queer place,” he told his companion, but Hamilton turned a blank face. He had almost lost the power of sight; his whole mind was bent on forcing his sick body into movement.</p>
			<p>As they began to descend, an oppression seemed to lift from Archie’s soul. The horror of the place where he had landed left him, now that he had come into a clean bright country. Also the band of iron round his brow fretted him less. He found that he moved with greater ease, and he could lend a hand to his tottering companion. When they reached the first grass he felt hungry, and they sat down to complete their breakfast. But Hamilton could only manage a single raisin, though he drank thirstily from a stream.</p>
			<p>The whole place was a riot of blue light, the heavens above and the lake beneath; even the rim of silver sand seemed to catch a turquoise reflection. The air, too, was no longer the dry, throat-catching thing of the high snows, but fresh and clement. The sun warmed them gratefully, and Archie’s eye recovered its old keenness. He saw a bird at last and the ornithologist awoke in him.</p>
			<p>“By Jove, a black snipe,” he cried. “The first I’ve seen.”</p>
			<p>The road they had followed skirted the northern edge of the lake and led them straight to the ruins near the western end. At close quarters the strangeness of the latter was increased. This had been a castle, like any Scots peel tower, the guardian of this fair valley. It had long been deserted, but the keep still stood foursquare, of a masonry which time and storm could not crumble. Archie examined it curiously. No mortar had been used, and the stones fitted into each other with such mathematical exactness that a knife could not find a lodgment. There were no signs of windows. Whoever dwelt here must have dwelt in darkness unless he had some means of artificial light.⁠ ⁠… Archie remembered a story which Luis had told him of the old lords of the mountains, who controlled the Poison Country. They dwelt secure, he had said, for they made a belt of poison round them, and in their windowless dwellings they lived by candlelight. No, not candles, Luis had added, something stranger⁠—natural gas, or perhaps electricity⁠—for he believed that they were great men of science.⁠ ⁠… At the recollection this clod of masonry, solid as a single boulder, seemed to link him up again with the vale of horrors behind him. The sunshine had become less bright, the place less innocent.</p>
			<p>Beyond the keep was a meadow where the stream from the lake issued. Here Archie saw something which had been hitherto hidden by the ruins, and which made him drop Hamilton’s arm and hobble at his best pace towards it. It was an aeroplane⁠—a seaplane, drawn up just beyond the sand of the shore.</p>
			<p>Archie recognised the make⁠—a Wentworth B⁠—of which there were none in the Gran Seco. His next observation was that it was out of action. The floats had been damaged, and the propeller was bent. Had it crashed?⁠ ⁠… It was D’Ingraville’s machine beyond doubt. Had Janet travelled in it? What had befallen her?</p>
			<p>With a sinking heart he examined the thing, and presently he was reassured. The machine was damaged, but there had been no serious accident. It must have alighted in the lake, for it had been drawn by human hands up on the shore. He saw the grooves and ribs which it had made in the sandy beach.⁠ ⁠… He examined it carefully. There was still a good supply of petrol in the tank. Could he use it? A further inspection convinced him that he could not. Repairs were needed, and he had no means of repairing it.</p>
			<p>His first impulse was to destroy it. He could easily set it on fire and reduce it to a ruin of bars and wires.⁠ ⁠… But what good would that do? If Janet had come in it and was now somewhere not far off, this might be a means of escape. How, he did not know, but there was no point in burning a possible boat.</p>
			<p>Then a few yards off he saw something white on the grass. It was a tiny fragment of cambric, with a monogram in one corner. Janet was always dropping handkerchiefs; he spent his time retrieving them.</p>
			<p>He stood with the thing in his hand, and a lump rose in his throat. He wanted to cry, the first tears since his childhood. Janet had sent him a message, Janet who had disappeared into the darkness. By some miracle he had found touch with her, the one chance in a million had succeeded. A great wave of longing and tenderness engulfed him. He stood blindly, as visions of Janet passed before his eyes, her dancing grace, her whimsical humour, her friendly courage. He had picked up her handkerchief, here at the ends of the earth, as he had so often done at faraway Crask.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>Then suddenly, for the first time since her loss, there came to him hope. An unreasoning hope, but as vivid as a revelation. She was somewhere near⁠—two days ago, not more, she must have stood on this very spot. He would find her. Nay, he would rescue her. The Providence which had led him thus far so strangely would not fail him.</p>
			<p>With this new confidence something returned to Archie. He became his normal self again, and felt desperately sleepy. He had not slept for days.</p>
			<p>Hamilton sprawled limply near the ruined tower, his burning head pillowed on his arm. Archie got a piece of tarpaulin and some broken struts from the seaplane, and made him a shelter from the sun, which was now very warm in that bare place. He stretched himself at his side, and in an instant was sound asleep.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>He woke to the sound of voices. The covering had been lifted, and around them stood a group of men. Hamilton was sitting up and looking at them with sick eyes.</p>
			<p>The men were Indians, but of a type which Archie had never seen before. They were not of the Gran Seco breed, for those were bullet-headed and muscular, whereas these were of a leanness which made them seem inhumanly tall, and their heads were the heads of white men. Instead of the dull beady eyes of the Gran Seco, the eyes of these men were large and bright and lustrous, as if they lived in a perpetual fever. Their faces were so emaciated as to be almost skulls. Unlike the Indians of Olifa and the Gran Seco who favoured black ponchos, the ponchos of these men were of a dark red⁠—the colour of the raw earth in the País de Venenos.</p>
			<p>Yet, to his surprise, Archie felt no shrinking from them. They were armed⁠—with blowpipes and slender lances⁠—but they seemed to have no hostile purpose. They stood in a circle looking down gravely at the awakened sleepers.</p>
			<p>Archie scrambled to his feet, and held out his hand as the best gesture of friendship which he could think of. But there was no movement in response. Their hands hung stiffly by their sides.</p>
			<p>He tried them in Spanish. He told them that he had flown thither from the Gran Seco, and pointed to the seaplane to illustrate his mode of travel. He asked them if they had seen any white man in the neighbourhood⁠—especially if they had seen a white woman. Archie’s Spanish was apt to be of a biblical simplicity, and he explained his meaning with an elaborate pantomime. He was like a man who has a desperate message to deliver, but who finds himself stricken with partial aphasia.</p>
			<p>It appeared that they understood something of what he said, for they began to speak among themselves, in voices pitched so low that they sounded like the murmuring of insects. Then one, who seemed to be their leader, spoke. It was a kind of Spanish, oddly pronounced and very hard to follow, but Archie gathered that he was ordered to accompany them. The speaker pointed down the ravine towards which the stream from the lake flowed.</p>
			<p>“Right, my lad,” said Archie, “I’ll go with you fast enough,” and he nodded and grinned and waved his hand.</p>
			<p>Then one of them bent over Hamilton, who had lain back on the ground again with his hands pressed to his head. It looked as if these strange people knew something of medical science, for the man felt his pulse and the beating of his heart. He spoke to the others, and they moved apart. In a few minutes a little fire had been made of driftwood and thorn-scrub, while two of them took charge of Hamilton. They stripped off his greatcoat and tunic, and bared him to the waist, and then they proceeded to knead and pinch certain muscles, while his head hung limply over their knees. Then they prepared a queer little greyish pill which they induced him to swallow.</p>
			<p>Meantime an iron girdle had been put on the fire, and on it a number of little dried kernels roasted. Archie was given a share, and found them palatable: they tasted like crayfish, but may have been a kind of caterpillar. Then a rough litter was made, out of their lances and the tarpaulin, and Hamilton, now in a deep sleep, was hoisted thereon.</p>
			<p>Archie made a last effort to get some news to allay his anxiety and nourish his hopes. “White woman,” he repeated, pointing down the glen of the stream. But he got no answer. The leader, whom he addressed, faced him steadily with his bright, inscrutable eyes. But before they moved off they did the thing which Archie had decided against. They spilled petrol over the wings of the seaplane and applied to them a flaming brand from the fire. As Archie looked back, he saw beside the blue lake in the serene sunshine the bonfire burning garishly, like a sacrifice before the altar of the immemorial tower.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
