<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>X</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-1" id="chapter-1-10" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3>X</h3>
			<p>Mr. Sylvester Perry in his <i>Seeing Eyes</i> asked a question which has often been asked by travellers, why the Gran Seco had no other route to the sea except by the three-hundred-mile journey south to the port of Olifa. Its city is not more than a hundred miles as the crow flies from the Pacific. The answer which Mr. Perry gives is that which he had from one of the transient managers of the struggling copper companies, that on the western side of the plateau the mountains simply cascade into the sea. Archie, who had asked himself the question, reached the same conclusion from a study of a map prepared long ago by the British Admiralty. The close lines of the hatching, though they must have been largely a matter of guesswork, showed that the sailors who had surveyed the coast had no doubt about its precipitous character, and up in the northern apex, where the great peak of Choharua overhung the ocean, the contours made the drop as sheer as the side of a house.</p>
			<p>Oddly enough, about this time the same question occurred to the Gobernador. That northern angle had been left alone in his careful organisation of his province, for up there was neither wealth to be got nor men to get it. He called for the reports of those who had penetrated its recesses and all spoke with the same voice. The plateau rose in sharp tiers to meet the curve of the mountains, and these tiers were waterless desert. Higher up there were forests, which might some day be used for mine timber, and it might be possible to divert the streams from the snows, which now flowed seaward in sheer ravines, to the Gran Seco watershed. These things, however, were for the future. The Gobernador closed the reports and rolled up the maps, with a mental note that some day soon he must undertake a complete scientific survey of his province.</p>
			<p>It had become necessary for him to pay one of his hurried visits to Europe. The Gobernador led a life as arduous as Napoleon’s during the early years of his Consulate. Like Napoleon, he had made himself the master of every detail in every department, and, like Napoleon, he had instituted a zealous inquest for capacity, and, having found it, used it to the full. But, unlike the First Consul, he did not need to keep a close eye on his subordinates; they had become automata, minor replicas of himself, whose minds worked in accurate conformity with his. Of this loyalty there could be no doubt; they had lost the capacity for treason, since treason implies initiative.</p>
			<p>But on certain matters he kept his own counsel. There were letters from Europe and the United States, specially marked, which he opened himself, and which were never answered or filed by his most efficient secretaries. There were visits to various South American cities of which no report existed in the Gran Seco offices, though at the other end, in various secret Government bureaus, there may have been some record. In recent months these curious activities had increased. Messages in the Gobernador’s most private cypher had been more frequent; He had begun to take a minute interest in the policing of his province, in the matter of passports, in the safeguarding of every mile of the frontier. Distant police officials had been badgered with questions, and the special bodyguard of the Administration had been increased. Also the Sanfuentes of the younger branch, who was Olifa’s Minister for External Affairs, had twice journeyed to the Gran Seco⁠—an unheard-of affair⁠—and had been closeted for hours with the Gobernador, and on the second visit he had been accompanied by Señor Aribia, the Minister of Finance. New business, it appeared, was on the carpet, and for a fortnight the Gobernador did not appear at the Administration luncheons.</p>
			<p>There was an air of tension, too, in the province, which, like an electric current, made itself felt in more distant quarters. It affected Olifa, where there was an unwonted bustle in various departments, and high officials went about with laden brows and preoccupied eyes. It affected the foreign consulates and embassies of various South American States. It was felt in certain rooms in Washington, London, Paris, Berlin, and Rome, large rooms decorated and furnished in the deplorable style of Government offices, where behind locked doors anxious men talked far into the night. There was even a little extra stir in the dovecotes of Moscow, where a pale young man, who spoke bad French, had an interview with five others whose power was so great that even the governing caste knew them only by numbers, and thereafter a dozen insignificant-looking people crossed the Russian frontier with passports for various remote lands. It especially affected Mr. Roderick Wilbur, the American Consul in Olifa. That heavy man spent two energetic days, and a still more energetic night, which was largely occupied in burning papers. Then, leaving his office in the charge of his assistant and under the general care of Don Alejandro Gedd, he announced that he was about to take a holiday, and departed for the capital of an adjacent republic. There his holiday consisted in sitting in the office of the British Consul, and, being permitted to use his cypher, in sending, by way of the British Embassy in Washington, a series of messages which brought two of his Ministers out of bed at one in the morning.</p>
			<p>Yet in the midst of this activity the Gobernador must go journeying. His mission was, he said, to Europe, and in two months he would return. To Señor Rosas, the Vice-President of the Company, he committed the temporary charge. As the two sat in the big bright room on the first floor of the great Administration Headquarters, into which travellers on the top of the tramcars could stare, while the clack of typewriters around them was like the noise of frogs in a pond at night, they made an interesting contrast. Both were big men, but while the Gobernador was hard and trim and spare, the Mexican looked sallow and flabby, as if he had been meant for a fat man but was kept lean by overwork and anxiety. Nevertheless his eye was clear and healthy. There was no intimacy between the two, but there was obviously respect. For Señor Rosas had under his special charge the most difficult element in the community, the white foremen and engineers, who did not belong to the close brotherhood of the Conquistadors or the Bodyguard, and were not subject to the harsh discipline of the mine labourers. They were the nearest approach in the Gran Seco to a free society, and needed careful handling.</p>
			<p>Instructions were given, minute instructions, reports were referred to, diagrams consulted, calculations made, and the Mexican took many notes. Then the Gobernador pushed the papers aside, and his penetrating eyes dwelt on the other’s face. There was no cordiality between these two, only the confidence of a business partnership. They addressed each other formally, as was the custom in the Gran Seco.</p>
			<p>“I am not satisfied with the Police, Señor,” he said. “I have information that there is a leakage somewhere. It is certain that in recent months unlicensed persons have been inside our border. They may still be here. If they have gone, what have they gone to do? I have given instructions to make the mesh closer. That is not your province, I know, but as my substitute I look to you to see that the work is done.”</p>
			<p>The Mexican met the steady gaze of the other with an almost childlike candour. The hard lines of the jaw and cheek-bones made his large ruminant eyes at once innocent and unfathomable. English was being talked, and he replied in the drawl which he had learned in the States.</p>
			<p>“I reckon you can trust me, Excellency, to hand over this territory to you a little bit more healthy than when you left it. I’m to expect you back in two months’ time?”</p>
			<p>The other smiled. “That is my official leave. I may return earlier.⁠ ⁠… I have much to do, but it may take less time than I expect. Perhaps in a month⁠ ⁠… or less⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“Then you’ve got to fly to Europe.”</p>
			<p>“Europe is for the public, Señor. My business may be done nearer home. As yet I cannot tell.”</p>
			<p>“Say, you’re taking precautions? You’re not going alone? You’re a lot too valuable a commodity to be touring about like an ordinary citizen. There’s heaps of folk that are keeping something for us. You got to take precautions.”</p>
			<p>The Gobernador frowned. “It has never been my custom, as you know, Señor. A man who goes in fear of his life is a fool⁠—he had better be dead.”</p>
			<p>“That’s sound as a general principle. But I guess this is a special emergency, and I can’t have you running risks. You got to take the three men you had when you last went north. You know the bunch⁠—Carreras, and Dan Judson, and Biretti. I’ll have them washed and tidied up so as to do you credit. They won’t obtrude themselves, and they’ll do as they’re bid, but they’ll be at hand in case of dirty work. If there’s any shooting, I’ll say they shoot first. You aren’t justified in taking risks, Excellency. There’s a darned lot too much depends on you. I reckon you’re too big a man and too brave a man to be afraid of having some fool say you take mighty good care of your skin.”</p>
			<p>The frown relaxed. “I suppose that is common sense. I will take the men with me.”</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>In Olifa the Gobernador did not go to a hotel. He had his rooms in the great Gran Seco building in the Avenida de la Paz. He did not leave the building much⁠—at any rate by day; but he was a magnet to draw the eminent thither. Señor Vicente Sanfuentes and Señor Aribia visited him there, and on two occasions the President himself, modestly on foot, and not accompanied by the tossing plumes and bright harness of the Presidential Guard. Also General Bianca, the Minister of War, who had been in a dozen of the old wars of Olifa, came to pay his respects, and with him came the departmental heads, the Chief of Staff, the Director-General of Transport, the officer commanding the Olifa district, all youngish men, who had found in Olifa a market for professional talents which were no longer valued in Europe.</p>
			<p>Among the callers was Colonel Lindburg, the commissioner of police of one of the provinces. He had a report to make. “Acting upon your instructions, Excellency, we have inquired into the doings of our friend Don Luis de Marzaniga. He spends his time between the country house, where he lives alone with his widowed mother, and his cattle-ranch in the Vulpas valley. In an ancient car he is at all times bumping over the roads between the two. Also he is often at Veiro, for he advises the old Don Mario about his young stock. I am satisfied that every movement of Don Luis for the past month can be amply explained.”</p>
			<p>“And Veiro?”</p>
			<p>“You yourself have seen, Excellency. Don Mario has entertained the young English baronet and his wife, and the American girl, Señorita Dasent. They were sent to him by his foolish cousin, Don Alejandro Gedd. I have had the place watched, and, except for Don Luis, no one else has visited there.”</p>
			<p>The Gobernador appeared to be satisfied, and, after compliments, Colonel Lindburg withdrew. But when the policeman had gone the great man opened a dispatch-box and took from it a small memoranda book. He re-read in it a message which he had received from Paris a month earlier, warning him that there was reason to believe that one X⁠⸺ (the name was obviously in code) had left Europe and was probably in Olifa. At the same time he turned up certain reports handed to him by the most trusted member of the Administration’s special police. These recorded various odd actions on the part of several members of the Mines engineering staff, on whom the Administration had chosen to keep a special eye. There seemed, said one report, to be a good deal of private meeting and talking among them, as if some agent had arrived to stir them up. A mysterious visitor had been seen, but the trail of him had been lost before he could be identified; his physical appearance had suggested Señor de Marzaniga, with whom, as a member of an ancient and intransigent Olifa family, the secret service was well acquainted. The Gobernador brooded over these notes. There was nothing of special importance in them; weekly, daily, he was in the habit of receiving similar communications; but some instinct had led him to single these out, and he had diverted the Olifa police to what had proved to be a wild-goose chase.⁠ ⁠… He was not satisfied, but he dismissed the thing from his mind. He had too many hard certainties before him to waste time on speculations.</p>
			<p>It was surprising during these days how much time the great man gave to the study of the press. Not the Olifa press, but that of every other South American country, and of the United States. His sitting-room was often like the reading-room in a public library, for he seemed to have an insatiable appetite for the journalism of the New World. Often he studied it in conjunction with the Olifa Ministers, and the study appeared to give them pleasure. There was at the moment an awkward situation in Mexico, and a more awkward one in connection with the little republic of Costemala, where Washington was upholding with several warships and a considerable force of marines an administration which apparently was not desired by the Costemalans. There was also trouble in the Canal Zone, where a certain State, hitherto most amenable to America’s persuasion, had displayed a sudden recalcitrancy. The American people seemed to be in a bad temper over these pin-pricks, an influential Senator had made a truculent speech, various patriotic societies had held monster demonstrations, and the press was inclined to be flamboyant. There was a great deal of talk about America’s manifest destiny; responsible newspapers discoursed upon the difficulty of a high civilisation co-existing side by side with a lower, and of the duty of the imperfect democracies of the South to accept the guidance of the mature democracy of the North. The popular press waved the flag vigorously, published half-tone pictures of stalwart American marines among the debased citizens of Costemala, and graphs showing how trivial was the wealth and how trumpery the armed forces of Latin America as compared with their own. The rest of the New World, it said, had got to learn to be democratic or take its medicine. These heroics did not go unchallenged, for on the Gobernador’s table were clippings from high-toned American weeklies, and addresses by University professors, and speeches of cross-bench public men, who, also in the name of democracy, denounced what they called a policy of imperial brigandage. The Gobernador read both sides with an approving eye. “This thing has been well managed,” he told Señor Sanfuentes. “Holloway has not disappointed me.”</p>
			<p>The press of the Latin South had a quieter tone, but it was notable for its curious unanimity, which extended even to the phrasing. The United States, it announced, was forsaking democracy for imperialism, the white robes of liberty for the purple of the tyrant. Very carefully and learnedly and urbanely, with many references to past history, it stated the case for the sacrosanctity of nationalities. It did not refer to the League of Nations, but professed to base its arguments on America’s past professions, and the great republican cause to which the continent was dedicated. There was an admirable good temper in its tone, and a modest but complete defiance. It could not believe that the great hearts and the wise heads of Washington would be betrayed into this dictatorial folly. The sounder elements in the United States would prevent it. It appealed from Philip drunk to Philip sober.</p>
			<p>The Gobernador studied the journalism of the Latin republics with special attention, and his visitors shared his satisfaction. “There is not a word wrong or a word too much,” observed Señor Aribia, who was himself a newspaper-owner. “This will make havoc among the mugwumps.”</p>
			<p>“What a fortunate chance,” exclaimed the Minister for External Affairs, “that the trouble with Costemala and Panama has arisen just at this moment!” His prominent eyes twinkled.</p>
			<p>“It is indeed a fortunate chance,” said the Gobernador gravely.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
