<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-2" id="chapter-2-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h3>
			<p>It was on the evening of the 9th day of August that D’Ingraville paid his brief visit to the Courts of the Morning. Archie departed at once to report, and returned next day to order certain precautionary measures. Two of their best fighting scouts, with Roger Grayne in charge, were stationed there, and arrangements were made for early notice of any future visitors from the air. By this time the camp at Loa was known to Lossberg and his next advance would be in that direction. But it was from the sea that the immediate danger was feared. Provision was made for closing the sea-ravine by explosions which would hurl down a thousand tons of rock and strip part of the gully as bare as the face of a wall. Since their communications with the outer world would thus come to an end, such action was to be taken only in the last resort, and it was anticipated that any ordinary attempt at landing could be repelled by the garrison of the ravine. Only if Olifa made an assault in force would heroic measures become necessary. The thing had to be faced, for D’Ingraville must have given Lossberg the exact position of their base, and, since it was obvious that it must be replenished by sea, it would be easy to discover the point of access to the shore. Plans had long been settled for evacuating the Courts of the Morning in case of need, and it was essential that an assault from the sea should be obstructed long enough to enable the plans to be methodically carried out. The one thing to guard against was surprise. A post was stationed on the shore, two others respectively a third and a half of the way up, and a strong garrison at the summit to guard the precipitous final section. All were connected by telephone with main headquarters and with each other, and there were numerous small mines laid which could be used in the detailed defence of each part of the route.</p>
			<p>The incident, however, had shattered the peace of the plateau. The place was no more a sanctuary, for its secret had been laid bare. Barbara, busy with her hospital stores, seemed to be unconscious of the change, but Janet fell a prey to a perpetual apprehension. She tried to laugh at herself, but the ghost would not be laid. The shelf of mountain, which had seemed so secure and homelike, was now but a narrow ledge on a great cliff, and she herself a climber sick with vertigo.⁠ ⁠… The enemy was down below in the woody shelves, slowly creeping nearer, and the army of defence was apparently at the other side of the Gran Seco. He was out on the broad seas, waiting for the dark of night to swoop in upon the coast. She would stare down into the green depths of the ravine, and imagine it peopled with fierce faces, and horrible with smoke and blood. In the coverts of wildwood on the plateau enemy spies might be lurking⁠—even far up on the grim face of Choharua. She pictured the enemy⁠—men with evil, pallid faces, such as she had caught a glimpse of in the streets in her visit with Archie to the Gran Seco, and at the picture she thrilled with horror.</p>
			<p>Her fears were worst at night, when she would awake at the slightest sound and lie for a space listening, with every nerve tense.⁠ ⁠… In the daytime she forced herself to cheerfulness, and managed to fill up every minute with duties. The weather was changing, and the spring rains were beginning. The sky, which for weeks had been an arch of crystal by day and by night a velvet canopy ablaze with stars, was now perpetually clouded, and often the plateau would be shrouded in a fine mist. This obscurity did not help her spirits. It seemed to offer cover for infinite chances of surprise by land, water, and air.</p>
			<p>One thing only gave her comfort. She had decided weeks before to make herself a good pistol shot, and now she assiduously practised, under Roger Grayne’s tuition. Grayne, large, rugged, shaggy, and imperturbable, was a fortunate companion for a nervous girl. Janet had always been a fine rifle shot, and now she became a very fair marksman with a revolver, and learned to shoot in any position.</p>
			<p>“That’s fine!” Grayne would say. “I shouldn’t like to be up against you in a roughhouse, Lady Roylance. Say, you’re not worrying about this little business? It’s all as right as rain.” And when, moved by his friendliness, she confided to him her doubts, he laughingly disposed of them.⁠ ⁠… The weather was far worse for Lossberg than for them. Supposing his planes arrived on a compass course, they were morally certain to come to grief, for the plateau was tricky in a dead calm, and certain death in foul weather to anyone who did not know it.⁠ ⁠… An attack from Loa! It would take weeks for the enemy to fight his way through the most difficult country on God’s earth, and there were roads by which every ounce of supplies could be got off before Lossberg was within thirty miles.⁠ ⁠… The sea! He admitted that there was a risk there, but there could be no surprise. There was just the one narrow avenue of approach, and that could be held against the whole darned Olifa navy long enough to give them ample time to move. “You see,” he concluded, “we’re so fixed that we can’t be surprised. Olifa’s got to come in force to take our sea approach, and coming in force means early notice. We’re not worrying about stray guardacostas. It’s not as if one man could wriggle through and bomb us in our beds. That’s the kind of game I don’t fancy, but it’s about as likely here as for an army corps to come over Choharua.”</p>
			<p>But if Grayne was a solid comfort to the girl, the <i xml:lang="es-ES">Gobernador</i> was very much the reverse. He, like her, seemed to be the victim of nerves ever since D’Ingraville’s plane had vanished seaward. He was no longer friendly and forthcoming, a pleasant companion indoors and abroad. He had become silent and preoccupied, and meals were Trappist-like banquets. Nor did he, as at the beginning of his sojourn on the plateau, spend much of his time in his own room. He seemed to dislike to be alone, and to have nothing on which he could fix his mind. From morning till night he roamed about the settlement, constantly turning his eyes to the sky, always intent and listening. There were no restrictions on his movements, so he went many times to the sea-ravine, and sat on the rocks at the top of it staring downward and seaward.</p>
			<p>Once Janet found him sitting huddled there in a waterproof coat, when a shower had passed and a watery sun was trying to shine. The air was stuffily raw, oppressive to the walker, but chilly when movement ceased. He was squatting like a figure of Buddha, and his eyes seemed trying to pierce the clouds which drooped low over the sea.</p>
			<p>“You are looking for your deliverers, Excellency?” the girl asked.</p>
			<p>He shrugged his shoulders.</p>
			<p>“I told you,” he said, “that folly is always punished. But its punishment may be also a foolish business. This holiday camp seems to be coming to an end.”</p>
			<p>“Perhaps. Do you know, your voice sounds as if you were rather sorry?”</p>
			<p>He did not reply, but unbuttoned the collar of his waterproof as if the weather choked him.</p>
			<p>“I have seen you shooting at a target,” he said at last. “You can use a pistol?”</p>
			<p>“Pretty well. I’m improving every day.”</p>
			<p>“Then you have the ultimate safeguard. You need not fear the worst.”</p>
			<p>“I hope for the best,” she said with enforced gaiety. “Perhaps I may shoot General Lossberg.”</p>
			<p>“Lossberg!” he repeated almost bitterly. “You need not fear Lossberg. I was thinking of something very different, and I am glad to know that in the last resort you will be safe.⁠ ⁠… Most women are afraid of pistols, but you are different from most women. After all, it is a merciful death.”</p>
			<p>Janet shivered, for the eyes which the <i xml:lang="es-ES">Gobernador</i> turned upon her had that in them which she had never seen before. There was anxiety in them, and something which was almost tenderness. She understood that if she feared the coming of his deliverers, so also did he⁠—and not for his own sake.</p>
			<p>“I’m afraid we are giving you a miserable time,” she said, trying to speak lightly. “We have dragged you out of your comfortable groove into an anxious place.”</p>
			<p>“You have upset the work of my life,” he said gravely. Then he added, as if by an afterthought, “and the foundations.”</p>
			<p>“The foundations?”</p>
			<p>“Yes. I had a clear course marked out, like a chart. Now the chart is overboard, and the rudder is swinging loose.”</p>
			<p>“There may be other charts,” she said gently.</p>
			<p>Then she averted her face and began to talk nonsense rapidly, for she realised that she herself must be the chart-maker.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
