<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-2" id="chapter-2-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h3>
			<p>On the evening of August 19th the rain, which had fallen all day, ceased, and a thin fog oozed out of the ground. By six o’clock night had fallen and a small wind had risen, and, since the sky was heavily overcast, the darkness was soon like the bottom of a cellar.⁠ ⁠… The moon would not rise for an hour or two, and, unless the weather changed, it would give little light.</p>
			<p>At the foot of the sea-ravine, in a log hut above the jetty, the coast garrison was preparing supper. Behind was a short space of flat ground, much of which had been cleared, but a grove of dead fan-palms remained, whose withered leaves rustled and creaked in the wind. It was a noisy spot, for the torrent after its breakneck descent drove through the boulders of the beach in a fury of loud white waters. In that sheltered bay the sea was calm, but the stream made a perpetual clamour as of beating surf.</p>
			<p>The garrison consisted of six Indians of the hills, four of Luis’s haciendados, whom he specially trusted, and two of Grayne’s ex-marines. The whole was in charge of one of the Alhuema engineers, a gnarled Ulsterman called Corbett, who had come to the Gran Seco from Rhodesia, and whose experiences went back to the Matabele wars. There was a small stove in the hut, and, since supper had just been cooked, the air in that tropical spot on the sea-level was like an orchid-house. A lantern stood on the trestled table, but windows and door were closed so that from the sea no light could have been observed. Only the white men and the mestizos sat at the table; the Indians ate their meal of boiled millet and syrup in their own circle apart.</p>
			<p>Corbett mopped his brow. He had begun to fill a pipe and had stopped as if in a sudden distaste.</p>
			<p>“I can’t smoke in this blasted conservatory,” he said. “Shade the light, Bill. I’m for a little fresh air.”</p>
			<p>He unbarred one of the windows and let in a current of steamy wind which stirred but did not cool the thick atmosphere of the hut. Outside the night was hot, noisy, and impenetrably dark. He stuck head and shoulders out, and promptly drew them back.</p>
			<p>“Bill,” he whispered, “come here! First stick the lantern under the table.⁠ ⁠… Look straight ahead. D’you see a light?”</p>
			<p>The man called Bill stared into the blackness and then shook his head.</p>
			<p>“Nix,” he said.</p>
			<p>“Funny,” said the other. “I could have sworn I caught a spark of something. It might have been on the water, or on the land across the channel. No, not at the seaward end⁠—at the end under the big red rock.⁠ ⁠… Here, Jones, you have a look-see. You’re like a cat and can see in the dark.”</p>
			<p>The Indian addressed as Jones had a long look. “I see no light,” he said. “But I can hear something which is not the wind or the stream. Bid the others be quiet.”</p>
			<p>He remained motionless for several minutes, like a wild animal that has been alarmed. Then he too shook his head.</p>
			<p>“It has gone,” he said. “For a second I thought I heard a man’s voice and the noise of a ship.”</p>
			<p>“But the whole damn place is full of noises,” said Corbett.</p>
			<p>“This was a different noise. The wind is from the west and the sea carries sound.”</p>
			<p>“Where might it have been?”</p>
			<p>“I think near the rock beyond the water.”</p>
			<p>“Same place as I thought I saw the light.” Corbett rubbed his bristly chin. “Can’t say I like that. Jones and me may be dreaming, but it’s the first time we’ve ever imagined anything like it. We’d better get the patrols out. Bill, you stay here, with Jones and his two mates. Keep your ears cocked and your eyes skinned. And you’d better call up Number One and tell ’em that we’re a bit anxious. Kittredge will take the southern beat up to the head of the gulf⁠—same three as last night⁠—and I’ll go north. It’s the water’s edge we’ve got to watch, so there’s no call to go fossicking in the bush.⁠ ⁠… Remember the drill, you all, if you hear a shot. We meet here again at midnight, when Bill and his little lot turn out. No smoking for you boys. Keep your pipes in your pockets till you get back.”</p>
			<p>We are concerned only with the doings of Kittredge and his party of three, whose beat lay south along the shore of the little gulf to where the land swung round in a horn of cliff to form the breakwater which separated the inlet from the ocean. He had with him one Indian and two of Luis’s mestizos. Beyond the jetty the trees descended almost to the water’s edge, high timber trees festooned with lianas, but for a yard or two on the seaward side the western winds had thinned the covert a little, and the track zigzagged among bare boles. Beyond, the hill dropped almost sheer, so that the traveller was wet by the tides, but farther on there was a space of treeless ground, covered with light grass and thorn bushes, and at the water’s edge, where another stream entered the sea, a reed-swamp, haunted by wildfowl.</p>
			<p>Kittredge divided his patrol. To the Indian he relegated the patch of forest, since he was the best man for a tangled country. The place where the cliffs dropped sheer to the water he left to one of the mestizos, for it seemed the easiest to watch, since its rear was protected. He himself with the other mestizo took the patch of savannah which stretched to the head of the gulf. They did not keep very near the sea because of the swamps, but chose the higher ground among the grass and scrub. It was not a good place for observation, since the ears were filled with the rustling of dry sedge in the wind, and the eyes in the darkness could have made out nothing except a light.</p>
			<p>Kittredge and his man saw no light, and they heard little but the wind in the grass and reeds and an occasional stirring of wild duck. They made their way to the head of the gulf and about eleven o’clock turned for home. They expected to pick up the other mestizo in the cliff section, but could not find him, so they assumed that, since they were a little behind time, he had gone back according to instructions to the rendezvous in the hut. The Indian in the forest belt was still awaiting them. He had seen and heard nothing.</p>
			<p>But the man in the cliff area had not gone home. He had sat for half an hour on the shelf of rock straining his eyes into the gloom. Then, being alone, he had become the prey of fears, for he was superstitious. He had said his prayers, and moved a little north, so that he could have the sheer rock-wall at his back. A movement in the sea startled him, till he decided that it was a fish. But he had become restless and nervous and again shifted his post, this time to a boulder which overhung deep water. He was just about to squat himself on it, when a sound halted him, and in a moment of panic he felt for his pistol. It was his last earthly act, for at that instant a knife was neatly driven between his shoulder-blades, and almost in the same movement his pistol was taken from his hand and his body slid quietly into the sea.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>At Post <abbr>No.</abbr> 1, two-thirds of the way up the ravine, the telephone message from the shore had been duly received. It was a small post, and the officer in charge, an old colleague of Corbett’s, was not inclined to disregard his warning. But since the post was at a turning, where the cliff was sheer above and below the path, there seemed no need for special precautions. Anything which came up the path would be instantly observed. But it occurred to him that it might be just possible to avoid the path and make a way across the creeper-clad precipice and the steep glen up a tributary stream, so he sent a man up the road to the only corner where such a shortcut could debouch.</p>
			<p>This man, an Indian of the Gran Seco, was not accustomed to forests, nor to the thick steamy darkness of that gash in the mountains. He started at every sound⁠—the cry of a piripipi bird, the rustle of a dead branch, the rooting of a wild pig, for all were unfamiliar. Presently, being a philosopher, he decided that every noise was alike and innocuous, and relapsed into meditation. His philosophy was his undoing. About a quarter of an hour before midnight, as he sat sleepily perched on the end of one of the many wooden bridges, something struck him, something as sudden and secret and deadly as a serpent’s fang. Quick hands thrust his dead body into the thicket. He was not missed by Post <abbr>No.</abbr> 1 till next morning at breakfast.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>At Post <abbr>No.</abbr> 2, the halfway post, placed beside one of the main platforms of the chute, the night passed without incident. There the ravine was broad and densely wooded, and the angle of the slope was only some 30 degrees. Nothing that night appeared on or near the path.</p>
			<p>The garrison at the summit were in tents strung out on both banks of the stream before it began its descent, and completely commanding the path and the off-take of the chute and the wire ropeways. The current of the stream had been used to develop electric power for haulage, and the engine-house stood close to the left bank. The post was admirably sited to command the path, but, owing to the obstruction of the buildings, it had no long field of view to left or to right. The uppermost part of the ravine was wider than the lower, and very steep, but ribbed with lateral spurs. It was possible for an active man to make the ascent by one of these spurs without the cognisance of the summit garrison.</p>
			<p>Geordie Hamilton, late of the Royal Scots Fusiliers, was not only in charge of the garrison but also of the engine-house, since by profession he was a mechanic. He and his men, mostly Mines workmen, were stalwart bulldogs to guard a gate, but they were not greyhounds to range at large. They had received Corbett’s warning from the shore, and till well after midnight were very alert to watch the only area from which they anticipated danger.⁠ ⁠… The wind was rising, and the glen was full of sound. They did not hear, and if they had heard they would not have regarded, the fall of a stone in a subsidiary gully a quarter of a mile to their left, the creak of a log, and the long screech of metal on stone which means that nailed boots have slipped.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Janet had gone to bed in a happier frame of mind. The <span xml:lang="es-ES">Gobernador</span> had caught cold, and Barbara, fearing fever, had given him a sleeping-draught and packed him between blankets. Moreover, she had shifted him from his ordinary quarters to another hut, one with a fireplace, which Janet and Archie had hitherto occupied, Janet removing herself to his in exchange. His new hut was close to the mess-room in the very centre of the compound; his old one was on the northern outskirts, selected originally in order that it might be specially guarded by sentries without making the fact too obvious.</p>
			<p>Janet slept till a little after midnight, and then for no apparent reason she found herself wide awake. This was constantly happening to her nowadays, and she lay for a little with her nerves on stretch, listening for she knew not what. There was no sound except the wind, making odd little noises in the thatch and among the unseasoned planks of the hut. There were sounds, too, coming from inside, so she snapped her bedside switch and stared into the corners. But it was only the wind stirring a pile of old picture-papers and flapping a waterproof on a peg. Janet turned off the light and tried to compose herself to sleep again. She thought of a procession of ducks on a common and sheep coming through a gate, but it was no use. Very soon she realised that she was hopelessly wide awake and would not get to sleep again that night. She realised something more⁠—that her nervous unrest had come back with redoubled force. She felt her heart beating and her fingers twitching and a ridiculous, unreasoning fear at the back of her head.</p>
			<p>Very much ashamed of herself, she decided that there was nothing for it but to get up and dress. It was a wild night, as she saw when she opened the door, but there was some sort of moon, and her first idea was to go for a ride on the downs.⁠ ⁠… She wished she had a dog; Archie had found a mongrel terrier with the army and had meant to bring it to her but had forgotten.⁠ ⁠… She thought of going to look for Barbara, but felt some scruples about breaking into the beauty-sleep of one who slept like a log and had apparently no tremors.</p>
			<p>She dressed and again looked out into the night. It was windy and mild, the sky was thick with low clouds, and the moon gave only the faintest light. She could see the outline of the next hut, but very dimly, and she realised that her notion of saddling a horse and going for a ride was impracticable. She felt that a gallop would restore her balance, but in such obscurity she would certainly break her neck.</p>
			<p>Then she tried to read. She had been taking a course of Wordsworth, as something to distract her mind, and she resolutely plunged into the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Prelude</i>. But she found that the words did not make sense. The discovery irritated her so much that it almost restored her poise. “You little fool,” she told herself, “what kind of wife are you for a soldier? You should be back in the schoolroom. You have got the vapours, my dear. You who used to laugh at your sister when she was afraid to go to bed at Glenraden because of the ghost on the tower staircase!”</p>
			<p>Janet’s annoyance did her good. But she could not get rid of an intolerable sense of expectation. She looked at her watch and saw that it was after one o’clock. Five hours till daybreak! She lay down again on her bed, shut her eyes, and tried to remember all the jolliest things in her life. A certain picnic in her childhood to the Sea Skerries⁠—days with hounds in Warwickshire⁠—her first London ball⁠—escapades with her sister Agatha⁠—that memorable day in the rain beside the flooded Doran when she had first found herself in Archie’s arms. Archie! She thought of him with such a glow of pride and affection that she forgot her fears.⁠ ⁠… She began to picture their return to Crask and what she would do with the old house on the hillside.</p>
			<p>Her fancy was toying pleasantly with the future, when suddenly she sat bolt upright. She had heard a sound which could not be the wind.</p>
			<p>It was the sound of steps close to the hut, stealthy steps but unmistakable, as even a small noise can be in the midst of louder noises in a different key. She switched on the light. She had locked the door on going to bed, but had unlocked it when she looked out at the weather. To her horror she saw it gently open.</p>
			<p>A man came swiftly into the room⁠—and then another. Both had white faces and their brows were damp with sweat. One was a tall man with a hatchet face and a scar above his right eyebrow, the other was squat and muscular with rabbit teeth and a broken nose. Their clothes were much torn, as if they had had a rough journey.</p>
			<p>The eyes of both showed amazement and disappointment. They were looking for something other than a scared girl.</p>
			<p>“The <span xml:lang="es-ES">Gobernador</span>?” the first one cried, and “Where in hell’s the boss?” came from the other.</p>
			<p>Then Janet understood. She had her pistol under her pillow, and in a second had snatched it and fired. But it was wild shooting, the shot struck a rafter, and before she could fire again the men were upon her. They were men of quick decision and skilful at the job. A scarf was wound suffocatingly over her mouth and she was seized in a grip which seemed to crush the breath from her. She felt herself in the open air, and heard with almost her last moment of clear consciousness a voice saying, “If the bitch squeals, wring her neck.”</p>
			<p>After that she remembered little. She felt the colder breath of the night, and then swift movement in a man’s arms. There was a noise in the air⁠—she thought it was shots and cries, and sudden flashes of light. She was aware of being rushed along, of being suddenly dropped in cover, and then again of violent speed. She struggled till her limbs cramped, but she was like a baby in the hands of her captors. And very soon weariness and panic did their part, and a merciful numbness fell upon body and mind.</p>
			<p>Janet’s shot had awakened the camp. The pickets had fired in answer, the big arc lights had been turned on, and in three minutes the place was feverishly awake. But the sentries had been withdrawn from Janet’s hut, since the <span xml:lang="es-ES">Gobernador</span> was no longer there, and on that side the scrub came nearest, so that it was easy for the raiders to find cover. Yet they could hardly have escaped but for an unlucky blunder. Geordie Hamilton, hearing the uproar, had assumed that the camp was attacked by its landward approaches. That was the side from which he had always anticipated danger. Therefore, contrary to orders, he led the garrison straight to the camp, and all but stumbled on Radin, Judson, and Laschallas as they made their way to the sea-ravine. This meant that the post on its summit was empty, and the most difficult part of the descent was left unguarded.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Janet awoke from her swoon to find herself in the midst of water. She had a bad headache, and felt rather sick; also her body seemed to be a mass of aches. She was no longer bound, and had been laid on a rough couch of dirty cushions and tarpaulins. The weather had changed; above her was a blue arch of sky, and around her a circle of blue water, except on one side where a distant wall of green and umber told of land.</p>
			<p>Slowly recollection came back to her, and with it her powers of observation. She saw that she was in a petrol launch, some ten miles out in the Pacific. There were four men on board. Two were the rabbit-toothed man and the tall hatched-faced fellow she had seen in the hut. Another was sallow with thick black eyebrows, and the fourth was plump and yellow, with sharp little eyes. She lay very still, for all her tremors had gone. She knew the worst now. There had been treachery among the company in the Courts of the Morning. D’Ingraville had located their base, but some traitor must have gone out from among them and told the secret of the sea-ravine. These ruffians had come to rescue the <span xml:lang="es-ES">Gobernador</span>, and they had known exactly in which hut he slept. They had been foiled by his cold, which proved that he was not privy to the plot, and at this conclusion Janet felt an unreasoning gladness. Not finding him, they had carried her off⁠—no doubt as a hostage. At the thought her heart began to flutter again, but she resolutely steadied herself. The time for foolishness was past. She was not anticipating danger now, but in the thick of it, and must brace herself to meet it. She choked down every thought and memory which might weaken her resolution. Her business was to keep her head and play the game for her side.⁠ ⁠… But at the sight of the men with their evil faces she could not repress a shiver.</p>
			<p>They were not unkind to her. One of them brought her water and a towel and she was able to make a sort of toilet. Another fetched her a cup of strong coffee, a box with biscuits in it, and a couple of oranges. She could not eat, but the coffee did her good, and her headache began to mend.</p>
			<p>Then, from the land side, at a great height an aeroplane came flying. It must have been an assignation, for the men had been on the lookout for it, and a flag was hoisted. On nearer view it was seen to be a seaplane. It circled twice round the launch, and then slid gracefully down till it floated like a bird on the water. The launch steered towards it, and its occupant was revealed as a slight, youngish man, with a fair beard, an oddly-shaped head like a faun’s, and grey eyes that were set somewhat too close together.</p>
			<p>His face, as he caught sight of Janet, expressed surprise. The man called Laschallas spoke to him in rapid Spanish, and his brows darkened. He seemed to be cursing them, and the reply was an impassioned defence. Then he shrugged his shoulders and bowed to Janet.</p>
			<p>“I expected another guest, madame,” he said in French, “but we must rejoice at what fortune has given us. You will do me the honour to accompany me.”</p>
			<p>The transhipment was a delicate business, and was not accomplished without a great deal of angry speech. Janet kept a tight hold on her nerves and accepted the inevitable. The four men in the launch were brutes, but what was this smiling, faun-like creature, and whither was he taking her? She felt desperately solitary, cut off from all that was normal and dear.</p>
			<p>The plane lifted from the water, and turned seaward to gain elevation. Then it circled round, and steered for the wall of mountain.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
