<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-3" id="chapter-3-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
			<p>The short spring had gone, and it was already early summer at Charcillo. The gnarled tamarisks which lined two sides of the great pebbled courtyard were hung with long lilac blooms, and the poplars and willows were green along the water-furrows. The estancia was of an older type than Veiro. There were no neat paddocks and English-looking stables; part of the house itself had stood for three hundred years, and the thick walls of the corrals were almost fortifications. The place stood on a low ridge between the main stream of the Vulpas and a tributary, commanding to the west and south long views over savannah which gradually dipped to the blueness of the coastal plain. Behind, to the east, was more rolling country, but from every ridge might be descried fifty miles off the dark loom of the mountains, and in clear weather the northernmost peaks of Los Doce Apóstoles.</p>
			<p>For the past fortnight Janet had been a happy denizen of a fantastic world. She felt that she was now promoted to the rank of a combatant. Her adventure had by a marvellous chance been the turning-point in the campaign. As she looked back upon the last month, the fear and horror were forgotten. Her week of captivity was only like a dark night between bright and bustling days. Far back in the corridors of memory she saw the Courts of the Morning, a platform lifted high above the world, whence with a divine detachment they had looked down upon the struggles of mortals. That life could not have lasted, but it had done its work, for it had wrought a miracle in the Gobernador.</p>
			<p>What had become of the mysterious being with his inhuman composure and his secret thoughts? A new man had been born, a man who had forgotten his past and walked on a new earth with a curious innocence. He seemed to be happy, happy in companionship as well as in leadership. For beyond doubt he was a leader, and his post as generalissimo was no polite fiction. It was an unfamiliar world to him, but he had taken hold of it like a master. Modestly, simply, he had applied his mind to strange problems, and from the first day he had had an unquestioned authority. In the great movement through the passes, after Peters with the remnant of his command had gone north to Escrick, and Sandy had led his mounted three thousand into Olifa, it was the Gobernador who had spoken the ultimate word. By tacit consent he was always deferred to, and as he mastered the problems his authority became one of mind as well as of character. And he was happy⁠—that was the immense change. He seemed to have rid himself of a burden both of years and cares.</p>
			<p>Crowded days lay behind them. Charcillo was the base headquarters, but when the word to strike was given they would move to Veiro. Meanwhile the concentration was secret. The Olifa Government had no doubt news of trouble at the south-eastern edge of the Gran Seco, but they had no knowledge of what was happening in this wild corner of their own province. For the countryside was at their back and Luis’s agents controlled all the communications with the capital. They had spent a feverish week over the coming concentration, and to Charcillo at all hours of the day and night had come Luis’s lieutenants to consult. Some of them were young men whom Janet had met at the Polo Club or danced with in Olifa; many were officers of the Olifa reserve; some were grizzled haciendados from the skirts of the hills or rich industrials from Alcorta and Cardanio.⁠ ⁠… There was old Martinez and his five sons, who owned hundreds of miles of ranching ground on the skirts of the mountains.⁠ ⁠… And Ramirez and his clan, who were the fruit kings of Olifa.⁠ ⁠… And the Zarranigas from Pecos, whose ancestors had come to the country with Pizarro.⁠ ⁠… And young Miguel de Campanillo, whose kin had ridden with Toledo and whose family had given a later Olifa three presidents.⁠ ⁠… She did not quite understand them. These men were prosperous; they had no grievance against the Gran Seco; they were not of the rootless revolutionary type. Why should they want to join in this quarrel? But the chief marvel was Don Alejandro Gedd. The little man had become a crusader. Why? His patriotism in the past had chiefly shown itself in dislike of all things American. He had disliked Castor, too, and now he was his willing henchman.</p>
			<p>There was a big map indoors, on which with coloured pins the strength of the opposing sides was shown. Olifa had three battalions in the city, in camp in the Plaza de Toros, and she had a skeleton division at Pecos, and a battalion at Santa Ana. There were detachments at Alcorta and Cardanio, and on the latter place was based the small Olifa navy. These points were marked with green pins, but it was to be noted that sometimes close up to them was stuck a red pin. That meant that in such places there was a strong anti-Government element in the regulars. The red pins were widely scattered, but there were certain spots marked with black rings, which were the centres for concentration. One was on the railway south of Santa Ana, another at the junction south-east of Olifa, whence ran the line to Alcorta. But the chief was at the railhead west of Veiro. To the north the Gran Seco was unmarked. No news had come of how Peters and Escrick were faring in their intensive guerrilla campaign.</p>
			<p>The thing fascinated the girl. She seemed to be herself a player in a drama which was nearing its last act. Of the ultimate purpose she scarcely thought. Victory was to her a concrete thing, a single culminating moment, beyond which her mind would not speculate.</p>
			<p>Her one anxiety was Sandy. He had lost the briskness and the audacity with which he had begun the campaign. Perhaps he was tired; he must be, for he had worn himself to a shadow in the Gran Seco. A man has only a certain stock of vital energy, and he had squandered his lavishly.⁠ ⁠… But there was more in it than that, she thought. Sandy was a born adventurer, who must always be imperilling himself, working on the extreme edge of hazard, playing for an outside chance. But now the war was almost regularised. It was a revolution of the familiar type, where the rank and file took the risks. Sandy hated bloodshed. For war he had no use unless it was war on his special plan, an audacious assault upon the enemy’s nerves. The other kind, the usual kind, he would only accept if it were in defence of his own country, and Olifa was not his fatherland.</p>
			<p>Janet said as much to Castor, who had joined her where she sat on a low white wall, plucking at the long blooms of the tamarisks. He looked like a fighting admiral, who had strayed by accident into khaki.</p>
			<p>He nodded his agreement.</p>
			<p>“That is Lord Clanroyden’s trouble. He is born out of due season. He does not quite like a game where the chances are not hopelessly against him. Now that the odds have been shortened he is uncomfortable. But let him console himself. We have still a long way to travel. General Lossberg and I are in the position of each facing his own capital, like the French and Germans before Sedan. That is not comfortable for him, but it is not altogether comfortable for us. We have to keep him shut up in the Gran Seco, for if his army got out it would destroy us in a week. Also we have to persuade the Olifa Government that it will be well to make peace, and that may not be easy. Let the señor be at ease. It is still a war not of brute force but of morale.”</p>
			<p>“I think you are happy,” she said.</p>
			<p>“I am happy because I have found something. I have found friends, and I have found a better philosophy. Also I have found what I never had before, a country. I am discovering the rudiments of life.”</p>
			<p>“You are ten years younger.”</p>
			<p>He laughed. “And yet I am destroying all the things I have given my life to make. I have jettisoned my old ambition. I hoped to be a Napoleon to change the shape of the world. Fool that I was! I should only have begun to yawn after it was done, and then somebody would have shot me. Now I am quite content if I can help to make an inconsiderable Latin republic a more wholesome State⁠—and if I can prove myself not unworthy of my friends.”</p>
			<p>“That is the truth,” she said. “This is not Sandy’s country.⁠ ⁠… You have changed places, I think. You have come down into the homely world, and Sandy is beginning to wander in the cold uplands of his finical conscience. It is a side of him you have never seen, but I have. Unless he is tied to duties which need every atom of his powers, he will begin to torment himself with questions.”</p>
			<p>“That is perhaps the explanation of the adventurer,” was his reply. “He is happiest when he need not stop to think. For myself, I have thought too much about large matters, and I now think only of little things, like Olifa.”</p>
			<p>That night Luis returned, bringing with him Miguel de Campanillo, Don Alejandro, and one of the young Zarranigas. At supper, which was eaten on tables in the veranda under a grape trellis, for the night was warm, there was the equivalent of a Council of War. It was the eve of raising the standard. The troops at Pecos had been elaborately tampered with, and at a signal the majority which favoured the revolution would occupy the barracks and the depot, much as the Mines Police had done in the Gran Seco. But before that it was necessary to make certain that Lossberg would be detained beyond the mountains, and for this purpose Santa Ana must be occupied. This task was entrusted to Blenkiron, who with two thousand mounted troops was to move next morning. Once his job was completed, he was to join hands with the Campanillos at Pecos, who hoped to add their local levies to the regulars who would by that time have seized the place. The railway beyond Santa Ana was to be destroyed and the telegraph wires cut. Lossberg’s blockhouses did not come within eighty miles of Santa Ana, not farther south than the frontier station of Gabones, but, in case he attempted to break through, the narrow pass south of Gabones was to be held in strength, and the road which accompanied the railway was to be comprehensively mined. Meantime the concentrations at Veiro and Alcorta Junction were to be completed, and the dockyard at Cardanio was to be taken.</p>
			<p>The talk at first was all of numbers and distances. Castor, who carried a multitude of figures in his head, satisfied himself that nothing had been omitted, and he was answered by Luis from a file of messages. Then, as the stars pricked out, and the wind from the hills began to temper the heat, the company relaxed. Soon the air was blue with cigarette smoke, and some, cramped by a long day in motor-cars on bad roads, strolled into the courtyard, where the scent of flowers from the great painted wine-vats was mingled with sharper smells of baked earth and miles of grasses. Presently Sandy went off with Blenkiron and Castor to verify some figures. Barbara and Archie walked with the young Zarraniga, and Janet found herself in a party of four with Campanillo, Luis, and Don Alejandro.</p>
			<p>There was something in the tropic night which went to her head. Though she had no prospect beyond the courtyard shimmering under the stars, she seemed to be looking from a watch-tower over an immense country⁠—steaming coast marshes, baked white cities, miles of waving green, cliffs red as blood falling into an angry blue sea, mountains that stretched cold fingers to the very courts of heaven. For months she had been breathing that air which only belongs to lands which man has not yet mastered, and its sharpness and strangeness had entered her blood. She was in love with space. For a moment she was a patriot of this huge child of a raw and half-made continent.</p>
			<p>“Don Alejandro,” she said, “do you remember the first night when we dined with you in the Olifa hotel? You told us about Olifa, how she had no problems⁠—no discontents⁠—because she was rich and secure. But you said that she had bartered her pride for prosperity.”</p>
			<p>Don Alejandro laughed. “True,” he said. “I also said that she had no soul, but in saying that I lied. Olifa has always had a soul, but it has been sleeping. Now it looks as if Luis had awakened it.”</p>
			<p>“What puzzles me is why?” Janet said again. “You had no grievances⁠—I mean the ordinary people. They had an orderly Government and light taxes and no conscription, and the reason was the golden eggs from the Gran Seco. What has made the ordinary Olifero angry with the golden goose?”</p>
			<p>“He is not angry.” It was Luis who answered. “He does not trouble. The ordinary man everywhere in the world only wishes to be left alone. Revolutions are not made by the many but by the few. Yet there are enough of the discontented, I think, to do our business.”</p>
			<p>“But why the discontent?”</p>
			<p>“Because we have remembered our pride. We of the old houses have not been happy in a State which was no better than a big trading firm⁠—with foreign brains to do the work which the Olifero should do himself.”</p>
			<p>“What work?”</p>
			<p>“Governing us and defending us. Our army is mainly a force of skilled mercenaries. And our Government⁠—well, the voice of the ministers was the voice of Olifa, but the wires which made them speak and act were pulled by the Commander-in-Chief, who is now having a final talk about Santa Ana with Lord Clanroyden and Señor Blenkiron. We have still an old-fashioned prejudice in favour of governing ourselves.”</p>
			<p>“How long have you been organising this discontent?”</p>
			<p>“How long, Sandro?” Luis asked Gedd. “About three years come Christmas. The thing went fast, for the spirit was there waiting for it. Prosperity is not enough for us Oliferos. Our pride was outraged by our stout bourgeois ministers, who took their orders so obediently from another.⁠ ⁠… But we organised in the dark, blindly, for we knew that we needed some notable piece of good fortune to succeed. Then we found the Yanqui Wilbur, and through him Señor Blenkiron. And at the end came Lord Clanroyden. It is a simple tale of the mercies of God. Let us hope that these mercies are not exhausted.”</p>
			<p>“But if Olifa was under the thumb of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Castor, won’t it be the same even if we win? He is our commander, isn’t he? Can you have a nationalist revolution led to victory by the man whose domination of your country stirred up your nationalism? You have made your chief opponent your leader⁠—a foreigner too, a man with no country.”</p>
			<p>“Not so. He is one of us.”</p>
			<p>“But he is an Austrian.”</p>
			<p>“On his father’s side he is Austrian. But his grandmother was a Campanillo, a great-great-aunt of friend Miguel here.”</p>
			<p>“Does he know that? Does Sandy know it?” The girl was open-mouthed in amazement.</p>
			<p>“He has always known it. I myself have known it this past year, and the fact was the basis of our plans.⁠ ⁠… It is a long story, Lady Roylance, too long to tell at this hour of the night. As you justly say, he had no country. That is a fashionable folly among certain clever people in Europe. To-day he has found one.⁠ ⁠… That was one reason why Lord Clanroyden and I planned to carry him off and maroon him up in the Patios de la Mañana⁠—that he might find his country. There is no loosing the chains of blood. Once he got the bitter-sweet smell of our land into his nostrils and the clean air of our hills into his lungs, we believed that the cobwebs would fall from his eyes and very old ancestral things come to life. That has happened, I think.⁠ ⁠… More than that, of course. Between us⁠—you, perhaps, especially⁠—we have made him a human being. He will dream different dreams now, more wholesome dreams.”</p>
			<p>“What will you do with him? Can you fit him in⁠—anything as big as he is?”</p>
			<p>“We will of course make him our President,” Don Alejandro interposed. “He is our great man, our show figure. We look to his brains to give us good government and to keep us prosperous.”</p>
			<p>“But can you harness him?” Janet persisted. “Can you turn Niagara into a useful stream which will irrigate gardens?”</p>
			<p>“He will harness himself,” said Luis, “for he is wise.”</p>
			<p>“And yet,” she urged, “for years he has been hugging ambitions vast enough to set half the globe on fire⁠—not silly whims, but closely-reasoned ambitions worked out to decimal fractions. He hated America⁠—that was why <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Blenkiron first decided to fight him. From what I remember of your table-talk, Don Alejandro, you also had no great love for America. Didn’t you say that you regarded her patronage as an insult to your country? Why should you wish to put a spoke in the wheel of a man who has the same prejudice?”</p>
			<p>“Because I am not a fool.” Don Alejandro spoke with a brusqueness remarkable in one so suave. “Because I will not have Olifa made a pawn in a crazy game which means ruin. I do not love Yanquis, apart from Miss Dasent and Wilbur and Blenkiron and perhaps three others. But I want my country to be a rival to the United States in power and quality⁠—not to be a blind mouse along with other blind mice in the hands of <i xml:lang="fr">déraciné</i> genius.”</p>
			<p>Luis laughed. “You have stirred up the gentle Sandro, Lady Roylance, by touching his sorest spot. I do not think you quite understand the meaning of Spanish blood. You ought to, for the British are nearest to us of any race. We are realists, you know, very calculating and prosaic and close to the earth. But we must have our glamour too, our touch of poetry. We make good monarchists⁠—and good republicans, if we can hit on the right president. Castor will suit us admirably, for he will give us poetry, which the dingy camarilla now in Olifa never did. He will have ideas and imagination and colour, and the air of magnificence. With him we will advance so fast that we shall astonish mankind. But his brilliance will not be dangerous, for all around him will be Spaniards, we Oliferos, very appreciative of poetry, but quite resolved to keep our feet on the ground. Like your Scotch, who will quote the poets and weep over them, and the next moment make hard bargains.”</p>
			<p>A lamp had been put on the table by a servant, and round it white moths were fluttering. As Janet looked at the faces revealed in its light, she received a sudden clear impression of something she had not met before⁠—an ardour which was not ashamed to reveal itself because it was in turn based on a revelation. Don Alejandro with his neat small features and high cheek-bones⁠—Luis, fair, golden-brown of skin, with his glowing eyes⁠—the young Zarraniga with his slender eyebrows and grave, rather sullen mouth⁠—there was something innocently apostolic about them. They were in the grip of an idea. Their patriotism was an adventure, for their country was still to be made.</p>
			<p>She smiled at the boy Miguel, and he smiled back at her. She had seen the same look, as a child, in the faces of young men starting for Flanders. Here was one to whom new horizons had suddenly appeared. Luis read her thoughts.</p>
			<p>“We are going to make a country which will offer careers for youth,” he said. “Our young men will no longer have to leave Olifa, or, if they stay at home, stagnate on their estates. Their future will be their country’s future, for they will govern it, and thereby we shall have an advantage over that great people whom Sandro so much dislikes. We shall invent a new civilisation in this continent, which will be a bridge between the old world and the new.”</p>
			<p>Sandy’s face suddenly appeared in the circle of light, and behind him Blenkiron and Castor. There was a hush, inevitable when serious talk is suddenly overheard. Blenkiron’s jolly laugh broke it.</p>
			<p>“Looks as if you folk had been picking on my poor little country,” he said.</p>
			<p>“No, indeed we haven’t,” said Janet. “We have only been deciding that Olifa is going to be neither a satellite nor an enemy of America, but an honourable rival.”</p>
			<p>“That’s fine! They’ll be mighty glad to hear it in Washington.”</p>
			<p>Archie and Barbara and the young Zarraniga presently joined them, and the group reassorted itself. Janet sat very still, her eyes on two faces, Castor’s and Sandy’s. In the first she saw what she had not observed before, a certain kinship to the men with whom she had been talking. It was a subtle resemblance, a thing not of feature or manner, but of a look in the eyes, a tone in the voice. Castor belonged here after all. He could be captured by a dream.⁠ ⁠… She had once said that he had a short-range imagination, and it was true. He was the ready slave of an idea.⁠ ⁠… And he was young. He had never been anything else but young. She looked at Sandy, and suddenly felt that they were old⁠—he and she and Archie and Blenkiron⁠—even Barbara. They could not be happily rapt into a dream, because they dragged too great a weight of tradition behind them. They were children of an ancient world, and could not break from it.⁠ ⁠… She no longer felt herself a sharer in their enterprise, but a benevolent stranger.⁠ ⁠… And Sandy? The burden had left his shoulders and he looked a little bewildered. Perhaps a little homesick? These others had found a country. Might it not be that he was longing for his own?</p>
			<p>She lay awake for some time after she went to bed, puzzling over this new direction of her thoughts. Might not something great come out of this venture, something of high moment for the world? And then she thought of a look she had caught on Barbara’s face, and she fell asleep with her mind on a fresh trail.⁠ ⁠… She was awakened at three o’clock by the sound of departing motor-cars. That would be Blenkiron on his way to Santa Ana. Her friends might have no spiritual share in the fervours of the rebellion, but they had a very practical part to play in it.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
