<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-2" id="chapter-2-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3>II</h3>
			<p>The wireless station on the plateau received its punctual bulletins of news from the outer world, copies of which were posted up in the mess-hut. From them it appeared that the republic of Olifa was already in the throes of a campaign. War had begun when on the 14th day of June the city of the Gran Seco had been seized by the rebels, and the whole province was in revolt. The whereabouts of Castor were not known; his lieutenants held the city, but he was reputed to be with the main force of the revolt, somewhere in the hinterland. Olifa had replied to the challenge. Her army was mobilised, and a Gran Seco Expeditionary Force was in being. The aged General Bianca, the Minister of War, did not take command; for that post the President had selected a younger man, General Lossberg, who had been military governor of the city of Olifa, and had come there after the European War with a high reputation from the Eastern Front, where he had been one of Mackensen's corps commanders. The Expeditionary Force was said to contain four divisions of infantry, a cavalry brigade, and four of the new machine-gun battalions.</p>
			<p>The comments of the world's press on the outbreak were curiously restrained. Some influence must have been at work, for the current story represented the revolt as that of the leaders of the copper industry against an oppressive Government, which confiscated their profits and by inhuman laws was ruining their reservoir of native labour. Thus stated, humanity and sound business seemed to be on the side of the rebels. Strange tales were printed of the barbarities of conscripted labour, of men worn to husks and sent back to their villages to die. The picture presented was of enlightened magnates forced unwillingly into harshness by the greed of Olifa, until finally decency and common sense forced them to make a stand. A spontaneous labour revolt had been sponsored by the masters themselves, and at the head stood Castor, the Gobernador. It seemed a clear issue, on which the conscience of the world could not be divided. There were papers in England, France, and America which hailed Castor as a second Lincoln.</p>
			<p>Yet the more responsible section of the press walked warily, which seemed to point to conflicting versions of the facts among those likely to know best. Such papers were guarded in their comments on the merits of the dispute, and treated it as a domestic Olifa question on which exact information was lacking. Patently the Gran Seco agents throughout the world were puzzled and were holding their hand. Their chief was playing a game on which they had not been instructed. The news columns of such papers were filled with sensational accounts of Gran Seco wealth and luxury and of Indian pueblas full of the broken and diseased, but the leading articles steered a discreet course. Castor was no doubt a great man, possibly a man of destiny, but the end was not yet--and Olifa had been of late a particularly docile and well-conducted republic. The world seemed to agree to make a ring round the combatants. Only the scallywags and the restless youth of all nations were prepared to take sides, and consulates and passport-offices were plagued by those who wished to reach the seat of war. There were perpetual queues at the door of the Gran Seco offices in London, New York, and Paris.</p>
			<p>One body of men alone had decided views--the military critics. Among these there was a remarkable unanimity. The revolt, in their opinion, could not sustain itself for more than a few weeks. The details of the Olifa army were well known. It was officered by able professional soldiers, it had been a pioneer in mechanisation, and <i>The Times</i> had published from a contributor some striking articles on its efficiency; it had behind it a wealthy Government, and, should the need arise, a big population to conscript; above all, it had an open door to the sea. The rebels must be at the best a rabble of Indian labourers and European miners, with a sprinkling, no doubt, of soldiers of fortune. They might be armed after a fashion, but they could not compete with the armoury of Olifa. They had no communications open with the outer world. Assuming that they had laid in a store of ammunition, they could not supply wastage. The Gran Seco, which was largely a desert, could not feed itself, and the rebels would be starved out long before they were defeated. It was like a fugitive who had climbed a tree: the pursuit had only to wait below till he was forced by hunger to come down. General Weyland in the London <i>Times</i>, and Mr Winter Spokes in the New York <i>Herald-Tribune</i> reached the same conclusion.</p>
			<p>The campaign had begun; according to the wireless Olifa was an armed camp, and everything was in train for an advance on the Gran Seco; but in the Courts of the Morning there was peace. There was activity enough. Daily aeroplanes left the shelf for long flights beyond the foot-hills, and over the arid steppes of the Gran Seco to the savannahs and forests of Olifa, now sweltering under the first deluges of the rainy season. Strings of convoys ascended by the rough paths and departed with their stores. Horsemen arrived hourly with messages, and every yard of the settlement was busy. Yet it seemed a peaceful busyness. The workers met at meals and in the evenings with the cheerfulness of weary but equable folk. There was no tension in the atmosphere. Castor for the most part had his meals in his own room, but he invariably appeared at dinner, and he seemed to be in good health and spirits. Though under constant surveillance, he had the illusion of liberty, and could walk abroad with Janet and Barbara as if he were a guest in a country-house. There was nothing about him of the feverish prisoner, and this disquieted Sandy.</p>
			<p>"I haven't begun to understand him," he told Janet. "You see, all I know about him I know at second-hand from Blenkiron, and by deduction from his public career. I met him for the first time a week ago. Our only talk was just an exchange of polite challenges. We might have been shouting at each other from adjacent mountain-tops.... I don't like that calm of his. Here you have a man whose brain has never stopped working, and who has the ambition of a fallen angel. He sees us trying to play havoc with his life's work, and he makes no sign of impatience. What has his mind got to bite on? It can't be idle."</p>
			<p>"He writes a great deal," said Janet. "He has told me about it. I don't think I quite understood, but isn't there an Italian called Croce? Well, he thinks Croce all wrong about something, and is trying to explain how."</p>
			<p>"O Lord!" Sandy groaned. "The fellow is bigger than we thought. I didn't reckon on this superhuman detachment. He must be very sure he is going to win."</p>
			<p>"Yes," said Janet thoughtfully. "But not for the reasons that the wireless gives. He told me that he thought that those military experts talked nonsense. I think he knows that he will win because he is bigger than we are. He has been studying us all most carefully. You especially, Sandy. Do you notice how he looks at you? I believe he was afraid of you before he met you."</p>
			<p>"But not now?"</p>
			<p>"No. I'm sorry, but I don't think he is so afraid of you now. I fancy he is always a little uneasy about anything he does not understand. But he thinks he is getting to the bottom of you."</p>
			<p>"I daresay he is. But I'm nowhere near the bottom of him. None of the formulas fit him. It's no good saying that he is pure intellect. He's that, but he's a great deal more. On his record I ought to hate him. He stands for everything I most detest, and he has been responsible for the bloodiest cruelties. On the bare facts of the case Nero was respectable compared to him.... And yet I can't hate him--simply because I can't hold him responsible. He has no notion what he has done, for, with all his cleverness, there's an odd, idiotic innocence about him. I nourished a most healthy disgust till I met him. But now, confound it, I rather like him."</p>
			<p>"So do I," said the girl emphatically. "Barbara doesn't, but I do. And I believe he rather likes us--even you, Sandy. You see, we are something that he has never quite met before, and we interest him desperately. He is busy summing us up, and that gives his mind something to work on. Now that I know him, I could no more hate him than I could hate a cyclone or an erupting volcano."</p>
			<p>"You mean he is a sort of impersonal natural force?"</p>
			<p>"No, I don't. He is a person, but very limited--as limited as a cyclone. His energies and his interests have been constricted into a narrow channel. I think he lacks imagination."</p>
			<p>Sandy whistled.</p>
			<p>"Good for you, Janet. I should have said that his imagination was the most deadly and colossal thing about him."</p>
			<p>"Yes--yes. But it is only one kind of imagination. Milton could imagine the scenery of Hell and Heaven, but he hadn't enough imagination to understand his wife. He is still a little puzzled by us, and that makes him puzzled about himself. Up till now he had been mathematically certain about everything. If we make him uncertain, we may win.... Now, I'm going to take him for a walk and continue his education."</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Presently, into the orderly routine of the plateau came something of the stir of war. Messengers from the lowlands became more frequent, and Sandy had to take his sleep when he could, for he might be called upon at any hour. The wireless operators were kept busy, and at night there was much activity in the ravine which dropped seaward, for unlighted ships groped their way into the secret gulf. The aeroplanes, which were still used only for intelligence purposes, and not for combat, brought back more authentic news than the war correspondents cabled to the press of the world, and that they gained it at some risk was proved by more than one that returned with damaged planes and bullets in its fuselage.</p>
			<p>The Gobernador had shown little interest in the wireless messages from the world's capitals. He had left Olifa with no more than a suit of dress-clothes, and had been fitted out from the wardrobe of Archie, who was much the same height and figure. One morning Sandy came in to breakfast with a new light in his eye.</p>
			<p>"Things are beginning to move, sir," he told Castor. "The time has come to get into campaigning kit. We shan't be a dressy staff, but we can't go about like earth-stoppers any more."</p>
			<p>Thereafter everyone appeared in simple khaki tunics and breeches. Castor submitted good-humouredly to the change.</p>
			<p>"You look like General Smuts, sir," Archie told him, "only a little darker and less benevolent."</p>
			<p>Castor smiled. "That would seem to be in keeping. Like Smuts, I am an intellectual compelled by fate to be a leader of guerrillas. Is it not so?"</p>
			<p>That night Sandy and young Latimer pinned up on the wall of the mess-hut a big map mounted on calico, and proceeded to ornament it with little flags.</p>
			<p>"There is your province, sir," he said, "a better map than anything the Surveyor-General has in Olifa. The colour-washes represent altitudes. The red flags are our posts, and the green are the Olifa army. I am going to give a staff lecture, for the bell has rung and the curtain gone up."</p>
			<p>The map showed only the northern half of the republic, from Olifa city to the apex where the great mountains crowded down upon the sea. From the Courts of the Morning the land fell in tiers--first the wooded shelves, then the barrens of the Seco Boreal, and then the broad shallow cup where the Mines and the city lay. From the Gran Seco city the country ran westward for a hundred miles till it ended in the rocky sierras of the coast. Eastward it rose into the savannahs of the Indian reserve and the Tierra Caliente, till it met the main chain of the Cordilleras. The map did not embrace this latter feature, and there was no sign on it of the pass into the Poison Country. The south boundary of the Gran Seco was a ridge of dolomite cliffs, broken apparently only at one place--by the long winding valley up which the railway ran from Santa Ana. From the contours it looked to be otherwise unapproachable from that side, save by one or two tortuous and difficult footpaths, at the head of which under Castor's administration there had been block-houses and patrols. There was no breach at either end, for on the west this southern ridge ran out in the coast sierras, and on the east became a buttress of the main Cordilleras <i>massif</i>. There were red flags in the city and at the Universum, clusters at two points in the Indian Reserve, one of them very close to the mountains, and a chain running up towards the Courts of the Morning. In the plain of Olifa there was a big green concentration at Santa Ana, and a green blob half-way up the railway.</p>
			<p>"Lossberg has got his rolling stock at last," Sandy explained. "He has his pioneers and one of his machine-gun battalions at the frontier, and his cavalry patrols were last night within five miles of the Gran Seco city."</p>
			<p>Castor donned a pair of horn spectacles and examined the map closely. He studied especially the Seco Boreal and the eastern frontier. He ran his finger along the southern rim.</p>
			<p>"That was always a troublesome place," he said. "Practicable for a mountaineer or an Indian, but scarcely more. At least, so our reports said. But we had to watch it. Rosas"--he smiled--"was always very strong about keeping posts there."</p>
			<p>He took a step backward and surveyed the map.</p>
			<p>"It appears that the military gentlemen who write to the papers are right," he said. "I seem to be in a very bad strategical position. Olifa can force a passage--it may take a little time and she may have losses, but she can fight her way up the railway to the Gran Seco. After that we are at her mercy, at least so far as the city and the Mines are concerned, for I do not suppose we can hope to win a field action against her."</p>
			<p>"Not a chance," said Sandy cheerfully.</p>
			<p>"Then nothing remains but a guerrilla war on our savannahs. I think she will beat us there, for ours is a hard dry soil and tanks and armoured cars can go anywhere. I speak as a civilian, but am I not right, Lord Clanroyden?"</p>
			<p>"Perfectly."</p>
			<p>"Our troops are mounted?"</p>
			<p>"All of them."</p>
			<p>"Where on earth did you get the horses? The Indian ponies are a miserable breed."</p>
			<p>"Not so bad as you think," Sandy smiled. "But we had other sources of supply. Olifa is a famous horse-breeding country."</p>
			<p>"But how did you draw on Olifa? How did you get the horses up?"</p>
			<p>"Some day I will tell you--but not now."</p>
			<p>The Gobernador looked puzzled.</p>
			<p>"I take it we have a certain amount of food and munitions?"</p>
			<p>"Enough to go on with."</p>
			<p>"But not indefinitely.... Then it looks as if before long our present dwelling-place would become a point of some importance. It is now our <i>poste de commandement</i>, and presently it may be our last refuge. We have access to the sea. If we can find ships, we shall have to make a moonlight flitting, as your people did at Gallipoli."</p>
			<p>"I shouldn't wonder."</p>
			<p>Castor took off his spectacles. "I speak with all modesty, but was it not a blunder to let Olifa strike first? I should have thought that our best chance would have been to obstruct the railway--like--like my Dutch prototype in your South African war. Can an inferior safely surrender the offensive?" And he smiled pleasantly.</p>
			<p>Sandy shook his head.</p>
			<p>"It wouldn't have done. We should have given old Lossberg a lot of trouble, but he would have smashed us in the long run."</p>
			<p>"Won't he smash us anyhow in the long run?"</p>
			<p>Castor moved closer and again studied the map.</p>
			<p>"God has been unkind to us in planting that wall of rock and snow in the east. It is most unfortunate that the southern wall of the Gran Seco runs clean up to the mountains without a convenient pass for honest guerrilleros to descend upon Olifa."</p>
			<p>"Most unfortunate," said Sandy, but there was no melancholy in his tone.... "Well, that's the layout. Now I will expound the meaning of our flags."</p>
			<p>He enumerated in detail the strength and composition of the various detachments, and then explained the composition and marching order of the Olifero forces. Castor listened attentively and asked questions. "We are holding the city lightly, but the Mines strongly. Ah, I see. We have a big detachment on the railway. Who, by the way, commands in the city? Rosas? We have given my friend the post of honour--and danger."</p>
			<p>Day by day the green flags crept northward till they were spilled in clusters beyond the Gran Seco frontier. Every evening Sandy gave his staff lecture. It was noticeable, now that the campaign had begun, that his spirits rose, and though he had scarcely time to feed or sleep he showed no trace of weariness. Yet there was tension in the air. The faces of the men would suddenly go blank as some problem swept them into preoccupation. Even the Gobernador was not exempt from these sudden silences. He alone had no routine work, but Janet, who had become his chief companion abroad, reported that he was becoming temperamental.</p>
			<p>"I think it is this place," she told Sandy. "I don't believe he has ever been much out-of-doors in his life before. He has always lived in cities and railway-carriages, and Nature is rather a surprise to him and puts him off his balance. He told me to-day that this living with sunsets and sunrises made him giddy.... His education is progressing. I wish I knew what he was thinking when he has that blindish look in his eyes."</p>
			<p>"He seems to be interested in the campaign," said Sandy. "As an intellectual problem, I suppose. Something for his mind to work upon."</p>
			<p>The girl hesitated.</p>
			<p>"Perhaps," she said. "But I think there is something more in it than that. He has been adopted for the first time in his life into a community. We others are busy at a game. He is like a child. He can't help hankering a little to play too."</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Presently events began to crowd on each other. The green flags made a forest between the Gran Seco frontier and the city, and spread out till their right wing was very close to the Universum Mine.</p>
			<p>"That's the cavalry," Sandy explained. "They're finding it a tougher job than they reckoned. Yesterday they tried a sort of Jeb Stuart ride round the city and came in for some rough handling from Peters. They've first-rate cavalry, but indifferent M.I."</p>
			<p>Then came a halt and the green flags did not advance for a day or two.</p>
			<p>"We put up quite a good little show," was Sandy's comment. "You remember the fifth mile-post down the line where it runs through a horse-shoe valley. That's our position, and it is pretty much like that of the Boers at Magersfontein. They can't find our trenches to shell us out of them. Lossberg is getting nervous about a frontal attack and is considering an enveloping movement. See! He has two of his machine-gun battalions moving east of the Universum. He's bringing up another infantry division, too. That makes three, besides oddments. A pretty good muster against our modest territorials!"</p>
			<p>Two days later the red flags had fallen back two miles along the railway.</p>
			<p>Sandy, with his eye on a smaller chart, elucidated the position on the big map.</p>
			<p>"Our forward zone has gone, and now we're in our battle zone, though we don't intend to have much of a battle. But we've got to stick it there for a couple of days.... You see this bunch of red flags east of the Mines? That's our counter-movement beginning."</p>
			<p>"It looks as if we were shaping for a big field action," said one of the young Americans.</p>
			<p>"Not a bit. We aren't looking for any barren victories. This is all directed to Lossberg's address. We know a good deal about him, and he's a cautious warrior. He's taking no risks, for he has the strength and he means to use it.... I hope to Heaven Peters doesn't dip in too deep."</p>
			<p>To Janet and Barbara these days were as thrilling as the last act of a good play. Up in that quiet place, they seemed to watch the struggle like gods from the empyrean. The very map became like a crystal in which their fancy could see the hot mustard-coloured hills, the puffs of shrapnel on the ridges, the ant-like movements of little mortals. Even the Gobernador lost something of his calm, and the eyes under his level brows kindled. In these days the aircraft were never idle. Every hour of the day and night heard the drone of their going or returning.</p>
			<p>On the evening of July 17th Sandy had much to tell.</p>
			<p>"You will be glad to hear that Lossberg has got his reinforcements. This morning the last division of his Expeditionary Force crossed the frontier."</p>
			<p>"You seem pleased?" asked the puzzled Janet.</p>
			<p>"I am. I don't want unnecessary bloodshed, and these small holding battles take their toll. It's only a matter of hours now till we acknowledge defeat and fling up the sponge. It hasn't been a bad show, except that Peters went further than I intended. He pushed his counter-attack at the Universum a little too deep, and suffered accordingly. That's the worst of the enthusiastic amateur.... There will be a great Olifa triumph presently. It will be fun to see what the papers make of it."</p>
			<p>Next day Sandy's good-humour had increased. He appeared at luncheon silent but beaming, and when an excited company gathered in the mess-hut before dinner he arrived like a breathless boy.</p>
			<p>"I want a drink, for I've had a dusty afternoon.... Thanks, Bobby, a whisky-and-soda.... We needn't wait. I can give you the news now. Early this morning we fell back from our last positions and all our troops have been withdrawn from the city. Lossberg's cavalry patrols must be in it now.... Also the Universum is in his hands, and the Alhuema and the San Tomé whenever he likes to have 'em. He will meet with no opposition. The first bout is past and we've been knocked over the ropes. It's Lossberg's round.... You needn't look anxious, Excellency. There hasn't been ten pounds' worth of damage done to the Company's property."</p>
			<p>"I wasn't thinking of the Company," said Castor, and his face had become very grave. "Has all this happened according to your plan?"</p>
			<p>"More or less ... except for Peters's venture. I didn't want our casualties to go beyond two hundred, and they're actually three hundred and seventeen. Still, your army has not suffered badly."</p>
			<p>"For God's sake don't call it mine. I'm your prisoner and your enemy. What's the next step? When is this infernal folly to cease?"</p>
			<p>Sandy grinned benignly. "Properly speaking, the infernal folly has just begun. The sparring is over and the real business is about to commence."</p>
			<p>The other considered. "Your plan, I take it, was to put up just enough resistance to compel Olifa to send the whole of her Expeditionary Force inside the Gran Seco. You know, of course, that she has reserves?"</p>
			<p>Sandy nodded. "But they will take some time to assemble, and they will have to make their way up."</p>
			<p>"Why should they not?"</p>
			<p>"It may be difficult, for soon there will be a most imperfect railway."</p>
			<p>"And Lossberg."</p>
			<p>"Our first business was to get him in. Our business now is to see that he does not get out."</p>
			<p>Castor laughed, but there was no mirth in the sound. "An ingenious plan! I have been obtuse. I might have guessed it."</p>
			<p>Dinner that evening was a strange meal and a short one. There was little talk, since for the first time the unpredictable future brooded over all of them like a cloud. In the cloud there was no depression, but a certain awe. Sandy and Castor were the last to rise. The elder man had recovered his balance, and as they left the hut his eyes met the other's.</p>
			<p>"We are declared enemies, Lord Clanroyden," he said, "and the gloves are off. I make you my compliments on your boldness. I take it you are about to leave me and assume the direct command of the revolutionaries?"</p>
			<p>"As your lieutenant. I shall report to you regularly."</p>
			<p>"Let that fooling stop. I am at present your victim, but some day soon the parts will be reversed. I have only one thing to say to you. You have succeeded for the moment in putting me out of action. But I am something more than a single man marooned up on this shelf of mountain. I have my bodyguard--everywhere in the world, and also in Olifa, and in the Gran Seco. You cannot destroy that bodyguard, though no doubt you have tried, for most of it is subterranean and secret. That force will be fighting for me. Its methods are what you would call criminal, for it does not accept conventional standards of honour. But it is resourceful and subtle and it will stick at nothing. What chance have you against it? You will be compelled to take risks, and that force I speak of will make those risks a certainty of death."</p>
			<p>"I wonder why you tell me that. Is it meant as a friendly warning?"</p>
			<p>"I am not your friend. It is a warning. I do not wish you to deceive yourself. I want you to know what is against you."</p>
			<p>For a moment Sandy stared at Castor's face as if he sought something buried deep in the man. Then he laughed.</p>
			<p>"Thank you, Excellency.... I hope they'll make you comfortable while I'm away.... If we meet again, we may be able to shake hands."</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
