<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-1" id="chapter-1-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
			<p>Archie set out on his exploration of Olifa with his nose in the air, like a dog looking for game. The spell of a new country had fallen on him, as had happened fifteen years before when he left school. The burden of the War and all it had brought, the cares of politics, the preoccupations of home had slipped from his shoulders, and he felt himself again an adventurer, as when he had first studied maps and listened hungrily to travellers’ tales. But now he had one supreme advantage⁠—he had a companion; and Janet, who had never before been out of Europe, was as eager as he was to squeeze the last drop out of new experience.</p>
			<p>He left over his more important letters for the moment and used those introductions which had been given him by the friends he had made during his time at the Madrid Embassy. The result was that the pair were taken to the heart of a pleasant, rigid little society⁠—as remote from interest in the Government of Olifa as an unreconstructed Southern planter is from a Republican White House, or a Royalist Breton from the Elysée. Archie was made a member of the Polo Club and played with agreeable young men, who had their clothes and saddlery from London and their manners from the eighteenth century. A ball was given in their honour, where the most popular dance, to Janet’s amazement, was a form of Lancers. They met composed maidens who were still in bondage to their duennas: and young married women, languishing and voluble, or discreet and domesticated, among whose emphatic complexions Janet’s delicate colouring was like a wood-anemone among gardenias: and witty grandmothers running terribly to fat: and ancient hidalgos with beaks like birds of prey. It was a comfortable society, with the secure good manners of a tiny aristocracy, but it knew of no world beyond its pale, and was profoundly uninterested in its neighbours.</p>
			<p>They went a little, too, into business circles, both Olifero and alien, the representatives of shipping and trading companies and the big foreign banks. This, too, was a pleasant world, good-tempered and prosperous. Here they heard much of politics, but it was business politics. The existing Government was spoken of with respect, but not with intimate knowledge; it functioned well, kept the country solvent, and left trade in peace. Politicians were a class by themselves, a dubious class, though it was believed that the present lot were honest. But they met none of the Copper people. These seemed to form an oligarchy apart, and were mentioned respectfully but distantly. When Archie asked about the Gran Seco he was only given statistics of output and an encomium on its efficiency. Of its President the commercial world of Olifa spoke as an ordinary automobile-manufacturer might speak of Henry Ford, as one who was a law to himself, an object to admire, but not to emulate.</p>
			<p>“This is a queer place,” Archie told Janet. “It seems to have two Governors⁠—the Castor fellow and the President⁠—and the ordinary man don’t seem to know or care much about either. It’s about time we started out for the Gran Seco.”</p>
			<p>But when Don Alejandro was approached on the matter he had to explain with many apologies that their permits had not arrived. There was some inconceivably foolish hitch, which he had not yet tracked down.</p>
			<p>“But the American troupe got through straight away,” Archie complained. “They left a week ago.”</p>
			<p>“I know. That is a way Americans have. Perhaps in your case the difficulty is <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wilbur. Officiously and quite unnecessarily he interested himself in getting your passes, so he said⁠—and he may have exhausted his purchase in franking his countrymen through and raised a prejudice. As I have told you, his nation is not loved by our Government.”</p>
			<p>Don Alejandro went on to explain that the delay could only be a matter of days. “Meantime, why not visit my cousin at Veiro? There you must go some time, and this hiatus gives you the chance.”</p>
			<p>So to Veiro they went⁠—fifty miles by train and twenty by motor-car along a superb concrete highway, which suddenly gave out four miles from the house, so that the journey was completed by a sandy track over primeval prairie. They arrived just at sunset, when the place swam in a clear coppery gold. The house was low and white and seemed to cover acres, with its adobe outbuildings, its great corrals for the cattle, and its trim red-roofed stables built on the English model. The palms of the coast had been left behind, and at this elevation the tropics had faded from the landscape. The garden was ablaze with coverts of hibiscus and plots of scarlet zinnias among the rough lawns, and the wind-breaks which flanked it were of acacias and walnuts. A big irrigation dam to the right caught the last rays of the sun, and beyond it the tender green of the alfalfa fields seemed a continuation of its waters. Far to the east, above the lifting savannahs, was a saw-like edge of tenuous white mountains which seemed to hang in the central heavens. There was a succession of thin spires now picked out with gold and rose. Archie asked their name.</p>
			<p>“Los Doce Apóstolas⁠—the Twelve Apostles,” said the driver, and rattled off a list of uncouth syllables.</p>
			<p>Don Mario Sanfuentes, the cousin of Don Alejandro, was small, spare, and blue-jowled, with the figure of a groom and the profound solemnity of the man who lives with horses. His wife was dead and his ranch and stables were to him both family and profession. He greeted his visitors with the grave courtesy of manner which needs no words to emphasise it. Their rooms were wide chambers with scrubbed wooden floors and windows looking across a broad verandah to a hundred miles of space, as bare and fresh as a convent dormitory. They had their meals in a dining-room which contained the remnants of the Sanfuentes heirlooms⁠—cabinets of lacquer and tortoiseshell, a Murillo which had been an altar-piece in one of the forgotten churches of the Conquistadors, fantastic tapestries now faded into a mellow confusion, an Italian triptych of carved ivory, and a great galleon of tarnished silver. But they sat mostly in Don Mario’s own room, where in the evenings a wood fire was lit in the wide fireplace⁠—a room where every table was littered with books and papers and cigar-boxes and quirts and crops and spurs, and from the walls looked down the delicate heads of those descendants of the Darley Arab, the Byerley Turk, and the Godolphin Barb whose fame has gone abroad wherever men love horses.</p>
			<p>By day Archie and Janet rode with their host about his estate, examined his young stock, and tried out promising colts on the gallops, where by assiduous care a better turf had been got than in the ordinary savannah. At every meal the talk was of horses, but at night, when the fire was lit, Don Mario from the depths of his well-rubbed armchair would speak at large of the land. In modern Olifa he had little interest, but he told of the diversions of his youth⁠—his pack of foxhounds which had to be so constantly renewed from England that he gave up the game in despair, tiger hunting in the forest country, punitive expeditions against Indian horse-thieves from the hills. The time passed in a delicious calm: a combination, said Janet, of Newmarket and Scotland. And then on the last day of their stay came another visitor.</p>
			<p>“I cannot tell you about this country,” Don Mario said, “for I am an old horse-breeder who lives apart. But I have bidden young Luis de Marzaniga to sleep the night. His mother was cousin to the husband of my great-aunt’s niece. Luis has travelled abroad and seen the world, but especially he has travelled in Olifa. No. He is no politician, nor is he engaged in business. He is like me⁠—what you call a country gentleman. But he has youth and inquisitiveness, both of which I have long since lost.”</p>
			<p>So, when the Roylances, having bathed and changed after a long ride in the sun, came down to dinner, they found a strange young man awaiting them. Don Mario’s evening garb had been a little like that of a deaf-mute at a funeral, but this young man wore the trimmest of dinner-jackets and the neatest of patent-leather shoes. His hair was as fair as Archie’s; but some colouring in his skin had made him sunburn not to Archie’s brick-red but to a rich golden-brown. His eyes were brown, and the large expanse of white in them was the only foreign thing in his appearance. Otherwise he looked like a young English cavalry subaltern, whose duties permitted him to hunt three days a week.</p>
			<p>Dinner that evening was a cheerful meal. Don Luis chaffed his distant kinsman, with whom he was obviously in high favour, and Don Mario expanded in silent laughter. All spoke English⁠—Don Mario very correct and stilted, Don Luis nobly ungrammatical but notably idiomatic. To Janet’s questions he replied that his education had been chiefly in Olifa, but that he had visited Europe seven times, and during the last six months of the War had had a commission in the French Air Force. He had only just returned from Paris.</p>
			<p>The mention of flying woke up Archie, and for a little the room hummed with technicalities. Archie inquired concerning the Olifa Air Force, and was told that it was efficient but small⁠—not more than five squadrons. The Olifero did not take readily to the air, and the pilots were mostly foreigners⁠—Germans who had found their career cut short at home, and, Don Luis thought, one or two Russians. “It is like all our army,” he said, “a little force of expert mercenaries. Olifa needs no army. In the future she will fight her battles with gold.”</p>
			<p>Don Luis was very ready to talk. He answered Archie’s many questions on sport with enthusiasm, and drew sketch-maps to illustrate the lie of the land. As to politics, he had not Don Mario’s apathy. He was ready with amusing portraits of Olifa’s statesmen and with cogent summaries of policy. He was also a humorist, and had a repertoire of tales. But he was a discreet young man, and ventured no opinion of his own. He was neither reactionary nor progressive, only an interested spectator.</p>
			<p>On the Gran Seco he was highly informing. He described the nature of the copper deposits, and the new processes which had reduced costs and made it the Golconda of Olifa. Castor he knew only by sight. “We of Olifa do not meet him, but we worship him from afar. He is the god who dwells in the sanctuary.”</p>
			<p>“The American Consul thought there might be trouble some day. The mine-labourers are rather a savage lot, aren’t they?”</p>
			<p>Don Luis laughed.</p>
			<p>“I think the wish may be⁠—how you say?⁠—mother to the thought. Señor Wilbur does not love the Gran Seco. No doubt it is a difficult place, but Señor Castor is beyond doubt a Napoleon and flourishes on difficulties. It will be all right.”</p>
			<p>“Why does he keep the place so tightly shut? We have been waiting a fortnight for a permit to enter.”</p>
			<p>“So! Then there must be some foolish mistake of clerks. Señor Castor is not likely to be uncivil⁠—least of all to a charming lady and to a member of the English Parliament. He is a lover of Europe.”</p>
			<p>Don Luis had many questions to ask in turn, and it slowly dawned upon one of his hearers that this candid and friendly young man was taking in more than he gave out. Archie was drawn to speak of his own past⁠—his eastern travels, his experiences in the War, even of his friends, who could mean nothing to a South American who had only once been in England. He found himself quoting Sandy Arbuthnot by name, as if he had been in his club at home.</p>
			<p>“I beg your pardon,” he said confusedly. “You can’t be interested in my yarning about people you never heard of.”</p>
			<p>“But I am deeply interested. Your friend is a wise man. How do you call him⁠—Arbuttnot?”</p>
			<p>“He was Sandy Arbuthnot, but his father is dead and he is Lord Clanroyden now.”</p>
			<p>“A lord! Clan-roy-den. Por dios! That is a strange name.”</p>
			<p>“Scotch,” said Archie.</p>
			<p>“Ah yes⁠—Scotch. That is your Highlands? Your Gran Seco? This Lord Clay-roy-den, he is in Scotland?”</p>
			<p>“I’m blessed if I know where he is at the moment. He’s never long off the road.”</p>
			<p>Janet, too, to her surprise found herself talking to this stranger as if she had known him from childhood. She described vivaciously her encounter with the Moplahs.</p>
			<p>“They are common as lentils in Olifa at certain seasons,” said Don Luis, “those noisy, emancipated American children. They have gone, you say, to the Gran Seco, where Americans are not loved. There may be work then for Señor Wilbur.”</p>
			<p>“They are really rather nice,” said Janet. “I think I have met one of them before.⁠ ⁠… Archie, I didn’t tell you, but I believe the tall girl who was with the Moplahs the first day and whom we never saw again was the Miss Dasent who came to Strathlarrig. She was some sort of relation of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Blenkiron.”</p>
			<p>“Not really?” exclaimed the interested Archie. “That’s curious. Did you ever hear of Blenkiron, Don Luis? He died the other day⁠—American, rather a great man⁠—he was the chap I was telling you about in the Shark-Gladas affair.”</p>
			<p>The other shook his head. “I do not think so. But American names are so difficult that it is hard to remember. They are worse than Clan-roy-den.”</p>
			<p>Don Mario made it his habit to retire to rest at ten o’clock, and Janet, being very sleepy, followed soon after. Archie and Don Luis lit a final cigar, and in the smoking of it strolled into the moonlit verandah. On this side of the house the view was not broken by outbuildings, and beyond a string of paddocks the eye passed to an endless sweep of yellow savannah which faded in the distance into a golden haze. The air was fresh, and, though the night was still, cool wafts seemed to drift soundlessly down from the hidden mountains.</p>
			<p>“My countrymen and yours fought each other for three hundred years,” said Don Luis, “but a Spaniard and an Englishman, when they meet, usually understand each other. I presume, with your permission, on that old sympathy, and I ask you boldly what are you doing here?”</p>
			<p>The young man’s manner had changed from the debonair ease which had marked it at dinner. It had become at once confidential and authoritative.</p>
			<p>“Fact is, I don’t know,” was Archie’s reply. “Principally, Janet and I are on a postponed honeymoon. I had a notion to pick up something about South American politics, which might be useful to me in Parliament.”</p>
			<p>“And you find Olifa rather barren ground?”</p>
			<p>“I did at first.⁠ ⁠… Now, I am not so sure.”</p>
			<p>“Will you let me advise you? We are both young men and have served in war. Stay a little in Olifa if you have not yet exhausted the charm of the capital, and then take your delightful lady on board the first ship and go straight home.”</p>
			<p>“Home? Why in the world?” Archie stared at the speaker.</p>
			<p>“You can go to Valparaiso and Buenos Ayres if they amuse you. But get out of Olifa.”</p>
			<p>“But why?”</p>
			<p>“I cannot tell you why. I am your friend, and a friend may venture to advise without reasons.”</p>
			<p>“But what’s the trouble? Olifa is a great deal more peaceful than Europe. You don’t mean to say that there’s danger.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“Olifa is a mask⁠—you have not seen her face. Look in front of you. You see nothing but flat pastures. But beyond you know that there are wild mountains. So I tell you that behind the flatness of Olifa there are wild things.”</p>
			<p>“Well, I’m blessed! D’you know, Don Luis, you are making Olifa rather attractive. You are giving me a very good reason why I should stay.”</p>
			<p>“But madame⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“I don’t know. For heaven’s sake, don’t tell her what you’re telling me, for if she gets a notion that there’s mystery abroad she won’t stop till she is up to the neck in it. But of course I can’t let her run any risks.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“I do not think that you will be able to help yourself⁠—if you stay. You may be caught up in a tide which will carry you to things very different from your respectable English politics.⁠ ⁠… And these things will not be a honeymoon.”</p>
			<p>Archie stared at his companion’s face. The moon was very bright and the face which it revealed was grave and set.</p>
			<p>“You are talking in riddles,” said Archie. “I wish you would be more explicit. You tell me to get out of the country, because if I stay I may have trouble. You can hardly leave it at that, you know. What kind of trouble? Perhaps it’s the kind that Janet and I might rather fancy.”</p>
			<p>“That is why I warn you. You are a young man with a wife. It is easy to see that you are not the type which avoids danger. But a wife makes a difference⁠—especially such a lady as yours. You would not wish to involve her, and yet you may unwittingly, if you do not leave Olifa.”</p>
			<p>“Supposing I were a bachelor, what would you say?”</p>
			<p>Don Luis laughed. “Ah, then, I should speak otherwise. I should make of you a confidant⁠—perhaps an ally. You wish to visit the Gran Seco, but your passports are unaccountably delayed. I might offer to take you to the Gran Seco, but not by Santa Ana and the Company’s railway.”</p>
			<p>Archie pondered. “Everything in this country seems to turn on the Gran Seco,” he said, “and we don’t seem to be able to get there.”</p>
			<p>“It may be that that blunder of officialdom is doing you a service,” said Don Luis solemnly.</p>
			<p>“Well, I’ve no desire to go there and get tangled up in a local shindy, which I take it is what you are hinting at. I remember <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wilbur said that the miners seemed to be an ugly crowd. I’m very much obliged to you, Don Luis.”</p>
			<p>“You will not tell anyone that I have warned you.”</p>
			<p>“Certainly not.⁠ ⁠… I’m rather inclined to take your advice, and tell Gedd to drop the passport business. I didn’t come here looking for trouble⁠—and, besides, there’s my wife.”</p>
			<p>But in this Archie was not wholly candid. He told himself that what he called a “dago revolution” had no charms for him, especially with Janet to take care of. But he realised that this phrase did not exhaust the mystery in Olifa, which had been slowly accumulating in his mind till the sense of it was like an atmosphere about him. Also he had taken a strong liking to Don Luis. The young man had a curious appeal in his alternate gaiety and gravity. There was that in him which seemed to beckon to wild and delightful things; he was such a companion as Archie a dozen years ago would have welcomed to ride with over the edge of the world. But Archie⁠—<i xml:lang="fr">rangé</i>, married, lame of one leg⁠—decided with a half-sigh that such visions and such comrades were no longer for him.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
