<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-3" id="chapter-3-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3>VI</h3>
			<p>A little before noon Archie brought his plane to a smooth landing in the great dusty amphitheatre which had been the bull-ring of an older Olifa, and was now sports ground and polo ground. The journey had been uneventful, and they had crossed the lines saluted only by a few rifle shots. It appeared that they were not unexpected. The place was empty, but there were pickets at the different entrances. As the travellers climbed out of the plane a squad of soldiers came forward at the double, and they completed their disembarkation in the presence of a substantial military guard. The officer in charge saluted.</p>
			<p>“We have come to keep an appointment with their Excellencies,” said Luis.</p>
			<p>“Their Excellencies await you,” was the reply. A big closed car had drawn up beside them, and he motioned them to enter. A minute later they were moving swiftly from the Plaza into the road which led to the Ciudad Nueva. Archie pulled up the blind of the back window and laughed.</p>
			<p>“They’ve got the needle, for they are putting the plane out of action. They must think we’re devils of fellows. Well, our boats are burned right enough.”</p>
			<p>The Avenida de la Paz slept in the noonday sun. On its broad sidewalk there were few of the well-dressed Oliferos whom Archie had seen on his first visit, but many of the riff-raff from the old city. There seemed to be little life in the splendid offices. The headquarters of the Gran Seco administration had no longer sentries at its doors. Olifa had lost its comfortable bustle and its confidence, and had acquired the air of a city in a crisis. At the street corners there were not police, but soldiers, and as the car swung up the hill towards the great copper dome of the Parliament House, there were frequent halts and the interchange of passwords. Archie reported that a car was following them containing an armed guard. “I feel as if I were in Black Maria,” he said. “Have either of you fellows ever been in quod before?”</p>
			<p>Their reception in the Grand Court was one of high ceremony. The sentries presented arms at the gate, and they were met at the main door by an aide-de-camp. There were soldiers everywhere, in the great entrance-hall, and at every turn of the broad marble staircase. First they were taken to an ante-room, where on a table light refreshments were laid out. “The señores may be thirsty after their flight,” said the aide-de-camp, as he bowed and left them.</p>
			<p>“Very handsome,” Archie observed.</p>
			<p>“Very politic,” said Luis. “The Cabinet believe that we have come to treat. No doubt they have their terms ready. It will be a shock to them to learn that our minimum demand is complete surrender.”</p>
			<p>Blenkiron’s eyes had been slowly taking in the magnificence of his surroundings. “We’ve gotten into the wrong atmosphere,” he explained. “The folks that live in a shack like this are bound to think that nothing can go wrong with them. It’ll stiffen their backs, for it looks as if it were built for eternity. We should have aimed to shift them somewhere where they could get a sight of Sandy’s braves or Melville’s roughnecks. You can’t scare kings sitting in their palace.”</p>
			<p>“Dwellers in palaces,” said Luis oracularly, “have weaker nerves than dwellers in tents.”</p>
			<p>The aide-de-camp appeared again. “Their Excellencies are ready to receive you,” he announced, and, holding himself very stiff and straight, he opened a door which led to the Council Chamber.</p>
			<p>It was a vast room, copied, like all the Olifa buildings, from an Old World model⁠—in this case from a room in a Venetian palazzo. The ceiling was painted with nymphs and goddesses, and statues stood in the alcoves of the panelled marble walls. The light was dim, for the sun-shutters were partially closed. At a table near the window sat, not the full Cabinet which Archie had expected, but five men. One was the heavy bull-necked President, with on each side of him Vicente Sanfuentes, the Minister of External Affairs, and Aribia, the Minister of Finance. Next to Aribia was General Bianca, and on the Foreign Minister’s other side a figure which made Archie stare, for it was Romanes, whom he had last seen in the Tronos del Rey. The President and his colleagues were in their customary black frock-coats and stiff linen, the old General was in uniform, but the Conquistador wore a suit of white drill. There was much bowing, and the three took their seats opposite the five, like witnesses before an official inquiry. A big silver box of cigars stood before the President, which he pushed towards Blenkiron, who shook his head. Archie alone helped himself; he wanted something to occupy his hands.</p>
			<p>The five showed no sign of embarrassment or strain. The President had still his air of massive composure, though the pouches under his eyes seemed a little heavier. The two ministers, Sanfuentes with his round shrewd face and Aribia with his well-trimmed beard, looked as if they were at an ordinary board meeting. The old General’s thin knotted fingers drummed on the table, but that had always been his habit. Romanes’s neat light-cavalry figure seemed more dapper than ever in its cool clothing, and his lean sallow face was as expressionless as the marble at his back.</p>
			<p>“Don Luis de Marzaniga we know well,” said the President, “and we have the honour of Señor Roylance’s acquaintance. You, sir,” and he looked towards Blenkiron, “I take to be the late Vice-President of the Gran Seco Administration.”</p>
			<p>Blenkiron did his best to bow. He seemed to find amusement in the scene before him, for his face wore a broad grin.</p>
			<p>“You have come, gentlemen,” the President continued, “to ask for terms.”</p>
			<p>“No, Excellency,” said Luis, we have come to offer them.”</p>
			<p>The President frowned slightly, and General Bianca threw up his head.</p>
			<p>“It is a trifling change of a word,” Luis continued, “but it is well to understand each other clearly from the start. We desire to make peace⁠—on the basis of facts. The republic of Olifa is in our hands, and therefore we are in a position to dictate the terms of peace.”</p>
			<p>The General laughed angrily. He had a long face with finely cut features and very large black eyes. His skin was like ancient yellow parchment. That day he wore all his many orders, and they trembled as he squared his old shoulders.</p>
			<p>“You are insolent,” he said, “insolent dreamers. You have been driven out of the Gran Seco, and as a last gambler’s throw you have stirred up trouble in Olifa. Pouf! It signifies nothing. Our army, having finished with the Gran Seco, will presently arrive, and where will your rabble be then?”</p>
			<p>His voice was becoming shrill and he was embarking on a fierce tirade when the President checked him.</p>
			<p>“Have patience, General,” he said. “Let the señores state their case. We can be patient, for we are confident!”</p>
			<p>Luis laid a map on the table.</p>
			<p>“General Lossberg is not happy in the Gran Seco,” he said. “We have still an army there⁠—an army in being, and it is occupying all his attention. I will be candid with your Excellencies. Your General holds the Gran Seco city and the Mines and much of the country, but for the rest we are masters. He is immobilised, for he cannot come to your aid. Already he has tried it. Sixteen days ago he attempted to break out through the passes of the south-east, which he had just discovered. He was beaten back, the door is closed, and some of his troops are our prisoners. As for the railway to Santa Ana, that route has been destroyed, and, as you know well, it is a route which is easily blocked. I do not think that he can come to you by that way.”</p>
			<p>“These are lies,” the General shouted. “We have the most expert army of its size on the globe. What can a handful of bandits and guerrilleros do against it? General Lossberg can burst his way through your barrier whenever he pleases. He has the latest guns and tanks⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I know, I know,” said Luis soothingly. “But it is too expert an army. It cannot compete with our rude simple ways.”</p>
			<p>Aribia laid a hand on the General’s arm.</p>
			<p>“You have a map, Señor de Marzaniga? You have perhaps something to say about Olifa.”</p>
			<p>Luis had much to say. He was dealing with men who knew their own country well, and he spoke as to experts. He took his hearers up and down the land, and explained how far the revolution had prospered in each district. He expounded in detail the revolt of the regular battalions, at Santa Ana, at Pecos, at Alcorta and Cardanio, and what accession of strength they represented. He showed them the position of each railway and railway junction. He gave the names of leaders, and at some of these names the ministers started. He was constantly interrupted with questions, which he patiently answered. He had an air of extreme candour, the air of a man who has nothing to conceal, and who is anxious to give the last tittle of information in his power.⁠ ⁠… Then he expounded the nature of the different concentrations, and the strategy of the advance on the city. “I take you into our innermost confidence,” he said. “That is proof in itself that we believe we are victorious. If we had any doubt, we should not be disclosing our plans.”</p>
			<p>The exposition lasted till two o’clock, when there was an adjournment for luncheon. They did not lunch together, for the three ambassadors ate in the ante-room to which they had been taken on their arrival. They talked little at the meal, for a heavy sense of futility had come upon all the three. “You can’t make that bunch understand facts,” said Blenkiron. “That is what comes of living coddled up in this palace. They’re still hanging on to Lossberg’s coat-tails.”</p>
			<p>Luis rather wearily agreed. “If Lossberg gets to Santa Ana, and their Excellencies get wind of it in time, our game is up. We won’t be having meals like this. It will be the Old Prison for us, and a very nasty corner of it, and the Gobernador will have to do without our services. I pray God that Sandy can hold the line a little longer.”</p>
			<p>Luncheon was followed by a short siesta, and they did not meet again till after four o’clock. The glare of the sun was no longer on the windows, and the green shutters were clamped back, so that the great chamber swam in the mellow light of afternoon. To Archie’s surprise the ministers were notably less rigid than in the morning. The President took the lead in the conversation. He did not deny Luis’s statements, as Aribia had done, but asked for some means of confirmation.</p>
			<p>“We offer you whatever you ask,” Luis answered. “This morning our nearest concentration was at Alcorta Junction within ten miles of this city. Appoint your emissaries, Excellency, men whose word you trust. They can go there under a flag of truce, and there they will find Manuel Martinez, and see for themselves. Or is there any other whose word you will take? The telephone service is working well.”</p>
			<p>“Is there no loyalist?” the President began.</p>
			<p>“I am afraid that what you call a loyalist may be hard to find. We have been too successful, you see. But⁠ ⁠… there is Don Mario at Veiro⁠—your cousin, Señor,” and he bowed to Sanfuentes. “Don Mario is no politician, and he has never in his life been able to lie. I will give you the password, so that you can telephone to him at Veiro. He knows little of the campaign, but he has eyes in his head, and he will tell you of the forces moving from the east and south.”</p>
			<p>“That is good sense,” said the minister, and he left the room. He returned after an absence of half an hour. “I have spoken to Don Mario,” he said shortly. “He is an old man and an innocent.” But it was clear that he had had news which discomposed him.</p>
			<p>To Archie the situation was like some preposterous stage play in a dream. He had suddenly an overpowering sense of detachment, so that he seemed to look at the scene before him as at a picture small and far away down an inverted telescope.⁠ ⁠… What on earth was he doing helping to deliver an ultimatum in a theatrical chamber in a hot white city many thousands of miles from home?⁠ ⁠… He sat a little away from the table, and saw only the back of Luis’s head and half Blenkiron’s profile, but he had the others in full view. The paradox of the scene nearly made him laugh out loud. He was a revolutionary, trying to upset a Government to which his own had accredited a Minister. These solemn five, what did he know about them? They were creatures of a world infinitely remote from his. He studied the President’s large swarthy face, heavy with the gravity of one accustomed to be obeyed and flattered⁠—stupid and dull, but not without traces of quality. In Sanfuentes he saw the family likeness to Don Mario, as far as an overfed sedentary man can resemble a hard-bitten country squire. He looked a little cunning and self-indulgent, but there was humour somewhere. Aribia was the ordinary business man, with cold shrewd eyes, but he had a pleasant smile.⁠ ⁠… Romanes! It was on him that his eyes chiefly rested. A wash of sunlight seemed to bring every feature into startling prominence. Archie saw the leanness of his head, the odd skull beneath the smooth hair, the curious hollows in his brow, the skin opaque as if no blood ran beneath it. This was Castor’s doing; the man had once been Castor’s creature, and Castor was their leader!⁠ ⁠… For a moment he felt some sympathy with the perplexed Cabinet of Olifa.</p>
			<p>It was Castor’s name which roused Archie to attention. Romanes spoke in his toneless voice for almost the first time.</p>
			<p>“It would have been well if the Gobernador had accompanied these gentlemen. No doubt they have full power to treat, but it would have been more satisfactory to meet the Commander-in-Chief himself.”</p>
			<p>“The Commander-in-Chief cannot leave his command,” was Luis’s answer.</p>
			<p>“Naturally. Still⁠ ⁠… there have been rumours, you know. We do not know if he is indeed in command. We do not know if he is in Olifa at all.”</p>
			<p>“You can be assured that he is. He is at Veiro.”</p>
			<p>Archie thought that he saw a flicker of sharp intelligence in Romanes’s eyes, but the next second it was gone.</p>
			<p>“I think their Excellencies would have welcomed a meeting. For after all, whatever is the destiny of this country, Señor Castor must mean much to it.”</p>
			<p>“He owes us an explanation,” the President growled. “He was our trusted colleague. Whatever he advised was done. Señor Sanfuentes will bear me witness when I say that he had a large share in the external policy of this State. The Administration of the Gran Seco was granted to him as if it was his private domain.⁠ ⁠… Suddenly, with no warning, he becomes our enemy. He must be mad.”</p>
			<p>“He is not mad, Excellency, but it is permissible for a man to change his mind. The Gobernador has to-day a policy for the Gran Seco and for Olifa itself which conflicts with that of your Excellency. Some of us, independently of the Gobernador, had the same notions. We have been endeavouring for months to persuade you and your colleagues that our views must be accepted. That is why we are here to-day⁠—to apply, if your Excellency will permit the metaphor, the last little weight to the inclining balance.”</p>
			<p>After that the five consulted in private, and it was dark before Aribia returned with an announcement.</p>
			<p>“We have decided to send representatives to Alcorta Junction to meet Señor Martinez and see for themselves. Do not be offended, please, for, as you yourself have admitted, confirmation is desirable. Will you arrange with Martinez for the reception of our envoys? The party will consist of two of General Bianca’s staff-officers and Señor Romanes. They leave to-morrow at daybreak.”</p>
			<p>So Luis had a busy hour on the telephone and then joined his two companions at dinner. They spent a dismal evening, before they sought their beds in the cheerless state apartments. “This is going to be worse than a League of Nations meeting at Geneva,” Blenkiron moaned. “I hoped they’d treat the thing as a business proposition, and I was ready to explain to them just how the Gran Seco should be run, and how it is going to be mighty advantageous to Olifa. They’ve all got fat bank accounts, and could understand my arguments. But we never got near business. A blind kitten could see that they’re not going to let go till they’re choked off. There’s more sand than I reckoned in that big President.”</p>
			<p>“They are waiting on Lossberg,” said Luis. “They will not give up hope till they are compelled. How in the name of God can we compel them, unless Sandy brings off some colossal stroke?⁠—and that is as likely as snow in summer. Jesucristo! At this moment he is perhaps making a desperate stand in the skirts of Santa Ana!”</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>The conference was resumed next morning with the half-closed sun-shutters again making a green twilight. It was now Blenkiron’s turn. Pending the arrival of the envoys from Alcorta Junction, he was permitted to state the views of the Gobernador on the future of the Gran Seco. The discussion was long, and necessitated many calculations, in which Aribia shared. The profits of the State of Olifa from the business need not decline; nay, there was every chance of their increasing, if the organisation were put upon more stable and permanent lines. The arrangements about Indian labour must of course be altered⁠—in any case they would have presently altered themselves. The extreme high-pressure production must be given up; also the Gran Seco must be put outside Olifa politics, except for its scale of contribution to the Olifa exchequer. It must be regarded as a special territory, to be governed under a special charter. The discussion was amicable. The ministers were all shareholders in the company, and, as an academic proposition, were prepared to consider it on business lines.</p>
			<p>In the afternoon the envoys returned, and, when after the long midday siesta the conference reassembled, Archie tried hopelessly to detect some change in the air of the ministers. He was disappointed. Romanes for some reason was absent, but the other four seemed in good spirits. Their placidity was unshaken. The President himself touched on the matter.</p>
			<p>“Your veracity has been vindicated, Señor de Marzaniga,” and he bowed politely, “but not, I fear, your judgment. You have undoubtedly recruited many men, but they are not an army. Our officers report that it is no better than a rabble, ill-armed, ill-disciplined, and led by amateurs.”</p>
			<p>“It is the people of Olifa,” said Luis hotly. “And you have seen only the spear-head⁠—one of the spear-heads. There is a weighty shaft behind it.” He spoke of the extent and variousness of the rising.⁠ ⁠… Every class was in it, every condition of life.⁠ ⁠… Among its leaders were representatives of every family that had been great in Olifa’s history.⁠ ⁠… Also the chiefs of every calling, the ranchers, the fruit-growers, the wine-growers, the industrial magnates of Alcorta. He was a little carried out of himself, and it was clear that his eloquence had some effect on his hearers. “We have all Olifa with us,” he concluded, “all Olifa that is worthy of the name.”</p>
			<p>The President laughed, but his laughter did not seem to come easily. “I know my countrymen, Señor de Marzaniga,” he said. “They have returned for an hour to the traditional habits which we hoped they had forgotten for ever. But they will not fight⁠—they cannot fight⁠—they have nothing to fight for. The ranches of Señor Martinez could not be more prosperous under a different regime. Ramirez has no complaints from his fruit farms. The Zarranigas breed their fine horses without Government requisitions, unlike the old days. These men are not fools. Presently they will learn wisdom.”</p>
			<p>“Or be taught it,” put in old General Bianca.</p>
			<p>Luis had recovered his balance.</p>
			<p>“There is one thing you forget, Excellency. We are patriots and love our country. Olifa is prosperous, no doubt⁠—but it has no soul. You and your colleagues have made it the appanage of a commercial corporation. We want to be a nation again.”</p>
			<p>Sanfuentes spoke impatiently. “A nation! What would you have? When your crazy war broke out we were on the eve of taking the leadership of this continent. We would have made Latin America a power in the world.”</p>
			<p>“I guess I know all about that, sir,” said Blenkiron. “You were going to make bad trouble in this continent, but it wasn’t for the sake of Olifa. The Gobernador was using you as a pawn in his own game. Well, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Castor has thought better of it, and I can’t see why in thunder you want to go on alone. Our slogan is ‘Olifa all the time and for its own sake.’ I advise you gentlemen to listen to reason, for you can’t fight against the whole people.”</p>
			<p>“The whole people,” said Aribia sweetly. “But that is precisely the point on which you have failed to convince us.”</p>
			<p>Presently lamps were brought, and the discussion wandered into a morass of futility. The ministers were waiting, not very confidently perhaps, a little shaken, but determined still to wait. It was the habit of their race, for the Oliferos are not a hasty breed. With a sinking of the heart Archie realised that there would be another day of indecision, while Sandy might be struggling hard to win an extra hour for their inconclusive diplomacy. Any moment the crash might come.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>It came about six o’clock when General Bianca was summoned by an aide-de-camp to the telephone. He returned in five minutes, almost at a run.</p>
			<p>“News,” he cried, “glorious news! Lossberg is in Pecos. I have spoken to his Chief of Staff.”</p>
			<p>The ministers were on their feet, and the exuberance of their relief showed the depth of their anxiety. They clamoured for details, but the General could give them little.</p>
			<p>“I spoke to Olivarez.⁠ ⁠… I recognised his voice at once.⁠ ⁠… He gave his name.⁠ ⁠… What did he say? Only that he was in Pecos, and was coming here without delay.⁠ ⁠… He is evidently pressed⁠—Lossberg’s orders no doubt.⁠ ⁠… Where he is, the General must be, and the Chief of Staff is naturally sent on in advance.⁠ ⁠… We have conquered, my brothers. To-morrow the city will be relieved, and the rebels scattered to the points of the compass.⁠ ⁠… It is the moment for toasts, for much talking has made my throat dry.”</p>
			<p>The ministers did not forget their manners in their hour of triumph. The three envoys were not asked to witness the toast-drinking, but were conducted ceremoniously to another apartment, where they too were supplied with sweet champagne. Only Archie tasted it, for the two others sat back in their chairs with the faces of broken men. It was at least an hour before they were ready to speak of fresh plans⁠—futile plans, it seemed, for they must now regard themselves as prisoners. As for Archie, he still felt himself living in a crazy world of illusion, but he was so tired by the strain of the day that he fell asleep.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>About nine o’clock an aide-de-camp appeared.</p>
			<p>“General Olivarez is arriving,” he said, and his air was noticeably less civil. “Your presence is required in the Council Chamber.”</p>
			<p>Once more the three envoys seated themselves at the table. It was obvious that the ministers had dined and dined well. Even Bianca’s parchment skin had a colour. Romanes was still absent.</p>
			<p>The door opened and General Olivarez was announced. Two men entered. One to Archie’s amazement was Alejandro Gedd, a figure like a scarecrow, dusty, dishevelled, grey with fatigue, his ancient dapperness utterly gone. The other was a slight man in the service uniform of Olifa, with a long olive-tinted face, a fleshy nose, and grizzled hair cut <i>en brosse</i>. He too seemed the worse for wear, and he had his left arm in a sling.</p>
			<p>It was Gedd who spoke.</p>
			<p>“Your Excellencies,” he said, “I have been sent to bring General Olivarez to your presence. This morning General Lossberg was decisively defeated in the passes north of Santa Ana. His main army has fallen back, and his advance forces were cut off and taken prisoner. Of this advance General Olivarez was in command. I was ordered by Lord Clanroyden to bring him to you that you might learn from his own lips the position of affairs.”</p>
			<p>The ministers were silent. Then old Bianca found his voice.</p>
			<p>“Is that true, sir?” he rapped out.</p>
			<p>“It is unfortunately true.” Olivarez spoke in a voice in which weariness left no room for bitterness. “Of the rest of General Lossberg’s army I cannot speak. I myself and over nine thousand of my men are prisoners in the enemy’s hands.”</p>
			<p>The President behaved well, for he showed no emotion of any kind. His face was like a stone, and his voice level and toneless. He turned to Luis and bowed.</p>
			<p>“We accept your terms, Señor,” he said. “General Bianca will issue the necessary orders to the city defence force.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
