<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-2" id="chapter-2-8" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h3>
			<p>Janet’s pistol-shot, and the answering shots from the sentries, awakened the camp effectually, but in the thick night, with a volleying wind, it was hard to locate the trouble. Grayne, who was in command, naturally assumed that the danger lay in the neighbourhood of the <span xml:lang="es-ES">Gobernador</span>’s hut, but Castor was discovered sleeping the heavy sleep of one dosed with aspirin, and Barbara, who slept next door, had heard nothing. The big arc lamps showed everything normal, and, since the light had been promptly switched off in Janet’s hut by the raiders, it was presently decided that it had been a false alarm. The arrival of Geordie Hamilton and his garrison from the head of the ravine complicated matters, and it was the better part of an hour before peace was restored. No one doubted that the whole thing had been a blunder of a nervous sentry who had taken a whimsy of the wind for a shot. Barbara went back to bed.</p>
			<p>She woke about dawn with an uneasy feeling. Why had Janet not been awakened by the noise⁠—Janet, the lightest sleeper of them all? It was a mild blue morning after the rain, so she slipped on a dressing-gown and ran across to Janet’s hut. To her surprise the door stood open, unlatched. The bed had been slept in, but the occupant had clearly got up and dressed. There was a faint smell which puzzled her, till she realised that it was powder; a shot had been fired in the place during the night. Then she noticed that the floor around the doorway was muddied, and that some of the furniture looked as if it had been violently pushed aside. Lastly, on one of the rafters she observed a jagged splinter which could only have been done by a bullet.</p>
			<p>With terror in her heart she hurried to find Roger Grayne, and in five minutes the camp was astir. The tracks of the raiders were clear on the road to the sea, except where they had been overlaid by those of Hamilton’s men. The Indian trailers had no difficulty in pointing to the very place where they had taken cover, and in deciding that there had been three men in the business, three men who, in departing, had been encumbered with a burden.⁠ ⁠… The very spot was found where they had circumvented Hamilton’s garrison on their way up. At Post <abbr>No.</abbr> 1 it was discovered that one of the scouts had not come back, and his body was presently found in the thicket at the turn of the road. Down on the shore Corbett reported the absence of one of the mestizos who had gone on patrol to the head of the gulf. The section where the cliffs dropped straight to the sea was searched, and blood was found on the reef by the water’s edge. The Indians scattered among the shore thickets, and soon reported that they had discovered the tracks of the raiders, both those going and those returning, and across the gulf evidence was found that a petrol-driven vessel had landed recently. The story was plain in all its details. Their base had been raided, and Janet had been carried off.</p>
			<p>“They did not come for her.” Barbara with tragic eyes clutched Grayne’s arm.</p>
			<p>“I guess they didn’t. They came for the <span xml:lang="es-ES">Gobernador</span>. Some swine has double-crossed us and given away his exact location, only he didn’t know that his Excellency was sick. They were certainly fooled about that.⁠ ⁠… But, my God! Miss Babs, we can’t sit down under this. It’s maybe bad strategy, but I’d rather they’d taken twenty <span xml:lang="es-ES">Gobernador</span>s than that little lady. Say, what do they want with her? A hostage, I guess. Who’d have thought Lossberg would be so bright?”</p>
			<p>“But where is she?” Barbara cried. All the colour had gone out of her cheeks, and her face was a waxen mask of misery.</p>
			<p>“Olifa, maybe. Yes, I guess she’s in Olifa. Don’t worry, Miss Babs. She can’t come to any hurt. We’re not fighting with savages who torture their prisoners. I wonder what Lossberg’s next move will be?”</p>
			<p>Grayne went off to give orders for the strengthening of the guards at the sea-ravine, since there lay their Achilles-heel, and Barbara bathed her face and tidied herself to meet Castor. This awful thing must be faced with a stiff lip, at any rate in the presence of the enemy. She was possessed with a cold fury against him. The enemy⁠—his side⁠—had made war on women and stolen that woman whom she had come to love best in the world.</p>
			<p>Some rumour had already reached him, for he was in the mess-hut, evidently dressed in a hurry, since he had a scarf round his neck instead of a collar. She did not know what she expected to find in him⁠—triumph perhaps, or a cynical amusement. Instead she found a haggard man with bleared eyes⁠—no doubt the consequence of his feverish chill.</p>
			<p>He startled her by his peremptoriness.</p>
			<p>“Have you found her?” he cried. “Lady Roylance?⁠ ⁠… What has happened?⁠ ⁠… Tell me quick, for God’s sake.”</p>
			<p>To her amazement he appeared to be suffering.</p>
			<p>“No news⁠—except that Janet has gone. We found the track to the water’s edge, and there must have been a launch.⁠ ⁠… They murdered two of the guards⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>She stopped, for something in his eyes took away her breath. It was suffering, almost torment. She had never known him as Janet knew him, and had regarded him as a creature of a strange and unintelligible world, though she had reluctantly admitted his power. Now the power remained, but the strangeness had gone. He had suddenly become human, terribly human. She had come to upbraid and accuse; instead she wanted to pity. She found one who shared to the full in her misery.</p>
			<p>“Oh, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Castor,” she cried, “where have they taken her?”</p>
			<p>“How can I tell?” he asked fiercely. “Have you sent for her husband?”</p>
			<p>She nodded. “Sir Archie is at Loa. He will be here before luncheon.”</p>
			<p>“And Lord Clanroyden?”</p>
			<p>“He is at the other end of the Gran Seco. He is busy with a big movement. He will be told, but I do not think he can come.”</p>
			<p>“But he must. What does his imbecile war matter?⁠ ⁠… Oh, you miserable children! You have played with fire and you will be burned.”</p>
			<p>There was so much pain in his voice that Barbara tried to comfort.</p>
			<p>“But surely in Olifa she can come to no harm?”</p>
			<p>“Olifa! Why do you think she is there?”</p>
			<p>“She was carried off by sea. Where else could General Lossberg⁠ ⁠… ?”</p>
			<p>“Lossberg! What has he to do with it? Lossberg is not the man to waste time on such a business. He has no desire for my company.”</p>
			<p>“But who?”</p>
			<p>“There are others besides Lossberg⁠—a far more deadly foe than the Olifa army. I warned Lord Clanroyden. I warned him that the true danger was not in the field.⁠ ⁠… Lossberg is not the man for midnight escapades. He is too stiff. Regular soldiers do not climb ravines by night and stick knives between the shoulders. That is another kind of war. That is the way of the Conquistadors. Remember that D’Ingraville, who first found us out, is one of them.”</p>
			<p>Barbara’s face had become as haggard as his own.</p>
			<p>“Then where can they have taken her?”</p>
			<p>“I do not know,” he said, “but not to Olifa⁠—no, not to Olifa.”</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Archie arrived a little after midday. He looked suddenly much older, and Barbara noticed that his limp had grown heavier. He was very quiet, so quiet that it seemed impossible for anyone to express sympathy. In a level, almost toneless voice he asked questions, and carefully went over all the ground between the camp and the ravine-foot. He had a talk alone with Castor, and announced that he was going back to the Gran Seco, and would return sometime on the morrow.</p>
			<p>Luis de Marzaniga, it seemed, had one foot in the theatre of war and one in Olifa; it might be possible for him to discover whether Janet had been taken to Olifa city. Also Sandy must be seen. He had cut the railway again, and was now engaged in worrying that section of Lossberg’s army which lay around the Mines. Ammunition, it appeared, was getting low, and it was important to replenish the store by captures. It was necessary that Sandy should be consulted, and his Intelligence department might be able to help.</p>
			<p>He flew off in the evening, a calm, self-contained, stricken figure, the sight of whom made Barbara want to howl. Once again it was halcyon weather, and the sight of smoke rising in straight spires in the blue twilight against the flaming background of the west almost broke her heart. About this time Janet should have been coming in from her evening gallop, shouting for her bath.⁠ ⁠… There was no dinner in the mess-tent that night, for no one could face a formal meal. Castor had kept indoors all day, and was now occupied in striding round the central square in the way passengers take exercise on board ship. He stalked across to Barbara.</p>
			<p>“Lord Clanroyden must come at once,” he said.</p>
			<p>“He can’t,” she said. “Sir Archie says that he is needed most desperately where he is. He is conducting a war.”</p>
			<p>“You know him well. You have influence over him. Cannot you bring him here?”</p>
			<p>The girl for a moment coloured.</p>
			<p>“I do not think I have any influence with him, and if I had I would not use it to take him away from his duty.”</p>
			<p>“Duty!” he said bitterly. “What duty is there in such a fool concern? He has started a fire which he cannot control, and soon it will burn down his own house. His own house, I say. He was a friend of Lady Roylance.”</p>
			<p>“So were you, I think,” said Barbara quickly. “Have you too not kindled a fire which you cannot control? The Conquistadors and the Bodyguard were your own creation.”</p>
			<p>For a moment there was anger in his face, and then it died out, leaving it curiously bleak and pale.</p>
			<p>“I think that is a fair retort, Miss Dasent,” he said, and resumed his sombre constitutional.</p>
			<p>Archie returned very early next day, not in the small Shark-Gladas, which was his usual means of travelling, but in one of the big Seaforths which were meant for bombing and load-carrying.</p>
			<p>“I want to see Castor,” he told Barbara. “I think he liked Janet, and he can help a lot. I’ve told Hamilton to report here in an hour, for there isn’t much time to lose.”</p>
			<p>The three sat in the mess-hut. The <span xml:lang="es-ES">Gobernador</span> had recovered his trimness of bearing, but the almost insolent detachment which had hitherto characterised him seemed to have gone. His air was restless, and his voice, when he spoke, had a sharper pitch. There was something angrily defensive in his manner, something uncertain in the eyes which searched the others’ faces.</p>
			<p>“I want your help, sir,” Archie said in his new, quiet, toneless voice. “You and my wife were friends, and I don’t think you want her to come to any harm.”</p>
			<p>“Help,” Castor broke out. “You make me impotent and then ask my help! I did not start this business. I am the victim of your absurdities. You have plunged this land into a war directed against myself. I am your prisoner, though you call me your leader. You have brought me into a world which is utterly unfamiliar. I have no mastery in it. I am accustomed to organise and govern, but I cannot organise the confusion you call war. I am a reasonable man, and this is the domain of the wildest unreason.⁠ ⁠… Then the crash comes, and you ask my help. You fools! You have made me more powerless than the rudest vaquero.”</p>
			<p>“I know, I know,” said Archie soothingly. “I have no business to ask you for favours, but I don’t think you will refuse all the same. You see, it is your old organisation that we have to fear, not the Olifa army. I do not think you want Janet to suffer at their hands.”</p>
			<p>“You have evidence?”</p>
			<p>“A little. Enough to act upon.”</p>
			<p>“But I cannot control them. I am cut off⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“No. But you can give me the benefit of your knowledge. Listen, sir. Our Intelligence have their own sources of news, and they are positive that Janet is not in Olifa. How they know I cannot tell, but we have never found them wrong. Further, they say that there are none of the Conquistadors or the Bodyguard now in Olifa. We may take it that the raiders belonged to one or the other. That is your own view, I think. Now, what facts have we? She was carried off in a launch⁠—that we know. If she was not taken to Olifa, she may be hidden somewhere along the coast. That is possible, but not very likely⁠—for two reasons. The first is that our own people know the coast, and my information is that there is no place on the whole line of shore under the mountains where any permanent camp could be made. If they landed Janet, it could only be for a day or a night⁠—it can’t be her final destination. The same is true of the low coastland farther south between the hills and Olifa, where there are nothing but malarial swamps. Janet may be there, but it is not likely, because of my second reason. Whoever carried her off wanted her for a purpose. They came for you, and took her instead, and they can only have taken her as a hostage. To use her as such she must have been taken to some place in touch with the Olifa army, and that must mean either Olifa or the Gran Seco plateau.”</p>
			<p>“But how could she reach the Gran Seco except by Olifa?”</p>
			<p>“It is only a guess, but yesterday afternoon Peters reported from Pacheco that a plane had been seen flying eastward. It was marked like our own planes, and was flying high. Enemy planes are not allowed in that quarter, and, seeing it bore our own markings, no further notice was taken of it. But it was observed that it was a seaplane, and since up to yesterday our army had no seaplanes, and Peters knew that, he thought it worth while to mention the fact.”</p>
			<p>“Well?”</p>
			<p>“We have no seaplanes. That plane was not ours, though it pretended to be. It may have been Lossberg’s, in which case he has diddled us. But I am inclined to think it was somebody else’s. Janet was carried off in a launch. Why should not her captors somewhere out at sea have arranged for a seaplane to meet them?”</p>
			<p>Castor rose and walked to the big wall map.</p>
			<p>“Show me the exact spot where the seaplane was seen,” he said.</p>
			<p>Archie pointed with his finger.</p>
			<p>“It was flying east?”</p>
			<p>“East with a point of south.”</p>
			<p>“It was undoubtedly D’Ingraville. I think you are right, Sir Archibald. D’Ingraville met the launch and he has taken your wife with him.”</p>
			<p>“Where? Can you help me to that?”</p>
			<p>Castor looked at the map again.</p>
			<p>“It is the direction of the País de Venenos. You have heard of it?”</p>
			<p>Archie nodded. “That was my own guess. Tell me more, sir.”</p>
			<p>“I can tell you very little. I have been there, but once only, and long ago. My colleagues, whom you call the Conquistadors, know it well. D’Ingraville, especially, and Pasquali. And Romanes⁠—above all Romanes, who should by now have returned from Europe.⁠ ⁠… There is a drug there which they depend upon.” The <span xml:lang="es-ES">Gobernador</span> spoke hesitatingly, like a man loath to divulge something of which he is scarcely proud.</p>
			<p>“I know about <i xml:lang="und">astura</i>. I am told that without it they will die.”</p>
			<p>“No⁠—not die⁠—not at once. But they will be unhappy. I have always believed that the Conquistadors would make some violent effort to replenish their supply. They will attempt to open up communications with the País de Venenos.”</p>
			<p>“You think they have gone there⁠—with Janet?”</p>
			<p>“I do not think that. It is not a place where white men can dwell. The Conquistadors perhaps⁠—they are immune⁠—but not the Bodyguard. Besides, I do not think a plane could land there, for it is a desperate country of gorges and forests. Somewhere adjacent, perhaps⁠—from which the País could be visited.”</p>
			<p>Archie was on his feet, striding about excitedly.</p>
			<p>“Somewhere adjacent!” he cried, and his voice was harsh with pain. “But where? There are thousands of miles of unexplored country. Somewhere where a plane could land⁠—the seaplane may have an undercarriage.⁠ ⁠… That must be in the hills. But Peters has all the Pacheco country patrolled, and beyond that the mountains rise like a wall.⁠ ⁠… If only I could get Luis, but Luis has disappeared on some job of his own.⁠ ⁠… Things aren’t going too well with us at the moment, you know. We’re terribly short of supplies, and Lossberg is getting cautious and won’t stick out his head to let us hit it.⁠ ⁠… You’ve told me all you can think of, Excellency? Well, I’m off. Hamilton should be here to report.”</p>
			<p>Outside the door stood Geordie Hamilton, the same stocky, impassive figure that had stumped heavily through four years of fighting in France, his blue eyes looking sullenly forth from a mahogany face.</p>
			<p>“You’re coming with me, Hamilton,” said Archie. “Got your kit? Full marching order. We don’t know when we will be back.”</p>
			<p>“Where are you going?” Castor asked.</p>
			<p>“To look for Janet.” The young man’s face seemed to Barbara to have regained a kind of peace. He would not return alone. Moved by a sudden impulse, she kissed his cheek.</p>
			<p>“Thank you, Babs dear,” he said. Then he held out his hand to Castor. “Goodbye, I think you wish me well, sir.”</p>
			<p>It was the first time that any of the party had shaken hands with the <span xml:lang="es-ES">Gobernador</span>.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
