<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-3" id="chapter-3-8" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h3>
			<p>That night, as we know, Sandy dispatched Olivarez in company with Don Alejandro Gedd to Olifa city. The following day was spent by the ambassadors in Olifa, and by Sandy at Pecos, in adjusting their plans to the new situation. There was an immense amount of work to be accomplished in the minimum of time. The great concentration at Alcorta Junction, which was now pushed up to the defence lines of the city, had to be regulated, and throughout the republic a stop-gap military Government had to be extemporised. Between the revolution and the ultimate settlement a difficult interregnum must intervene. Manuel Martinez came into the city to consult with Luis, but Castor remained at Veiro, whence he issued orders to the different provinces. So far as possible the work was left in the hands of the Olifero leaders themselves. Luis was the chief executive officer, and it was Martinez who became temporary governor of Olifa city, and old Ramirez of Cardanio and one of the Zarranigas of Alcorta who were his lieutenants, while young Miguel de Campanillo carried to Lossberg the instructions of General Bianca. It was wise to keep the foreign element in the background, that Olifa might believe that her redemption had come from herself.</p>
			<p>It was a torrid day with thunderstorms grumbling on the horizon, and Sandy, having received reports from the city which announced that all was quiet and orderly, and from Gabones, which told of young Campanillo’s arrival on his way to Lossberg’s headquarters, flung himself on a bed in the Pecos hotel, and tried to sleep. But sleep he could not, though every bone and muscle cried out for it. It may have been the weather, or it may have been the strain of the past days, but his mind refused to be composed and his thoughts beat a weary treadmill. He had none of the exultation of a victor, none even of the comfort which comes from a task accomplished. He laboured under a heavy sense of oppression, out of which anxiety stood like jags of rock in a stream. He could not believe that the end had been reached, not even when his reason approved that conclusion. Therefore he could not sleep.</p>
			<p>An aide-de-camp made a timid appearance, for he was afraid to break in on the siesta of his chief. But it appeared that the occasion was urgent. A man wanted to speak with the General. He had given his name. Sandy looked at the card proffered him, and read “<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T. S.</abbr> Lariarty.”</p>
			<p>“Bring him here,” he said, “and see that we are not interrupted. Wait⁠ ⁠… don’t be far away, in case I want you.” He smoothed his ruffled hair, and sat on the bed awaiting his visitor, and as he waited a ridiculous memory kept recurring⁠—the Eton Beagles in the fields beyond Slough, and himself and Lariarty, both newly become uppers, struggling desperately to keep up with the field, each determined not to be outdone by the other. Much water had passed over Cuckoo Weir since then.</p>
			<p>The man who presently stood before him would have made no figure in running over English ploughfields. Lariarty was no more the dapper and inscrutable Conquistador, armoured against a world which he despised. Some spring had broken within him, for he looked like one mortally sick in mind and body. But his eyes were no longer opaque. There was light in them, broken lights, like the eyes of a sick dog.</p>
			<p>“You’re looking ill, Tim,” said Sandy gently.</p>
			<p>“I think I am dying.⁠ ⁠… But that does not matter.⁠ ⁠… I must speak to you, Arbuthnot. You have behaved to me like a gentleman, and I pay my debts.⁠ ⁠… You think you have won, but you are wrong⁠ ⁠… unless⁠ ⁠…” The man seemed to gulp. “Veiro,” he croaked. “The women are at Veiro⁠—and the Gobernador.⁠ ⁠… They will be dead before midnight unless you can save them.”</p>
			<p>Sandy was on his feet, his lethargy gone. He shouted for his aide-de-camp. “Get through to Veiro,” he told the boy, “and to Olifa⁠—to the Ministry of War. Ask for General de Marzaniga.⁠ ⁠… Get a whisky and soda, too⁠—a stiff one.”</p>
			<p>The drink was brought by an orderly. “Swallow that, Timmy,” he said. “You’re all out, and it will buck you up.”</p>
			<p>But the other refused it. “It would kill me,” he said. “Never mind my health, Arbuthnot. You won’t get through to Veiro⁠ ⁠… nor to Olifa.⁠ ⁠… My colleagues have made their plans. Veiro will be isolated.⁠ ⁠… Why in the name of God did you leave your friends in that lonely place? They should have been in the midst of an army. When men are desperate, they think only of revenge.”</p>
			<p>“Who are ‘they’? The Conquistadors?”</p>
			<p>Lariarty nodded.</p>
			<p>“D’Ingraville is there, and Pasquali, and Suvorin, and Romanes⁠—Romanes above all. Larbert is dead, and I have not heard of Calvo. But Romanes⁠—” He choked again. “And there are some of the others too.⁠ ⁠… Judson and Radin and Martel, and, I think, Laschallas.⁠ ⁠… They have all death before them, the rope for some and for others a slower torture. Therefore they are mad.⁠ ⁠… Oh, what in God’s name are you waiting for? I tell you⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>The aide-de-camp returned. “We cannot get through to Veiro, sir,” he said. “There seems to be some breakdown on the line. And there is no answer from Olifa.”</p>
			<p>“So,” said Sandy. The grimness had gone out of his face, and he was smiling again. “I want the Rolls, Truslove,” he said, “at once. Captain Zarraniga will come with me. Tell him to pick four troopers, with a hundred rounds apiece.⁠ ⁠… I want the two big Daimlers to follow, with eight troopers in each. At once. There is not a moment to lose. Let General Melville know.”</p>
			<p>Lariarty had drawn himself erect.</p>
			<p>“Can I come with you, Arbuthnot?” he stammered.</p>
			<p>Sandy looked in his eyes, and he seemed to see behind the sickness and fever and the wreckage of the tragic years a shadow of the boy he remembered.</p>
			<p>“Most certainly you are coming with me, Tim.” He glanced at his wrist-watch. “It is now a quarter to nine. We shall be at Veiro by ten. God grant we are in time!”</p>
			<p>The night was warm and still, for the thunder had now gone out of the air, though it still grumbled on the horizon. It was a slow business clearing the environs of Pecos, for the roads were congested with transport, owing to the moving of troops from Alcorta Junction. But once the Vulpas valley was left behind, the car swung briskly along the hard, broad roads of the plateau called the Marpas, which is one of Olifa’s chief horse-breeding areas. There was only a finger-nail of moon, but the stars were like harbour-lights. Far behind could be seen the broad glow of the head-lamps of the following Daimlers. Sandy at the wheel did not slacken speed at the patches where the road had been ruffled by the winter rains. He drove like a man possessed, looking every now and then at his wristwatch.</p>
			<p>“Half-way,” he announced to the young Zarraniga as they passed a farm in a clump of chestnuts. Then the road climbed to a greater elevation and the light of the Daimlers behind seemed to come out of a trough. “Ten miles more,” he whispered, and Lariarty, who was jammed among the troopers behind, muttered something that sounded like a prayer. Still the road rose, and then came a long downward incline, and far away on the left a light twinkled. “Veiro,” said young Zarraniga. “Presently the good road will end, and we shall have Don Mario’s cart-track. We must be near the ravine of <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul and the iron bridge.”</p>
			<p>Three minutes later there was a jarring of brakes and the car came to a stop. A deep narrow cleft lay before them, and where had once been a bridge there hung only a drunken girder.</p>
			<p>“They have planned it well,” said Lariarty.</p>
			<p>The men tumbled out of the car, for the great Rolls was as useless as a child’s go-cart.</p>
			<p>“There are yet four miles,” said Zarraniga, as he followed Sandy down the side of the ravine and up the steep overhang of the far bank. “Four miles, and my men are not long-distance runners.”</p>
			<p>Sandy had squared his shoulders for the race, when Zarraniga halted him. “Half a mile on the right is the farm of Pedro Aguilar. He has young horses.”</p>
			<p>Pedro, who was a tenant of Don Mario’s, was roused from his sleep by the sight of seven armed men demanding mounts. Zarraniga he knew, and he trotted obediently towards his stables.</p>
			<p>“I have not saddles for so many, señor,” he explained.</p>
			<p>“Saddles be hanged! Give us bridles. Rope halters if you have nothing better.” Sandy was already delving furiously among the debris of Pedro’s harness-room.</p>
			<p>“Two are young beasts and scarcely broken,” said the man.</p>
			<p>“So much the better,” said Sandy. “I will take one and Señor Zarraniga the other.”</p>
			<p>Within five minutes two scared and angry colts were being hustled out of the corrals by the help of two pairs of Pedro’s long-rowelled spurs. Once in the open they found their heads turned firmly to the east, and fled like scared deer they knew not whither. They led by at least a hundred yards, flying the deep sandy scaurs, spurning the ant-heaps, slipping, stumbling, recovering, while the troopers on their more manageable mounts pounded heavily behind. When after the first mile Sandy had his animal under control, he found to his surprise that Lariarty was beside him.</p>
			<p>Now they were on the edge of the alfalfa fields and the water-furrows, and before them was the dark loom of trees. They swung to the left, avoiding the road which ran from the railway-station, and making for the line of poplars which hedged the garden. A light twinkled beyond the trees, a light which suddenly went out.</p>
			<p>And then, with a cry, Lariarty swung round his horse’s head and set the beast capering and plunging. He had all but ridden down a woman⁠—a tall girl in black, wearing pink roses at her breast.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>The same evening about half past seven Don Alejandro Gedd was taking the air in that part of the Avenida de la Paz which adjoined the Parliament House. He had had a busy day. For hours he had sat in consultation in the great Council Chamber, for he had two kinds of knowledge invaluable at the moment⁠—a wide acquaintance with the organisation of the revolution in the provinces, and considerable insight into the psychology of the capital city. He had been of great value to Luis and Blenkiron and Martinez, while they worked out the next moves⁠—the proclamation to the people of Olifa, the demobilisation of the levies, and the preparations for a presidential election. He had also been constantly on the telephone with Castor at Veiro, who was busy with the draft of the new constitution, which was to be embodied in the proclamation. Don Alejandro was contented, exhilarated, but also very weary. He decided that he owed himself a short spell of leisure, and resolved to dine alone at the club.</p>
			<p>But his hopes of a little rest were frustrated. He found himself accosted by a villainous-looking peasant, whose left wrist was bound up in a dirty handkerchief, and whose mahogany face showed a long shallow scar from right temple to chin, which must have been done recently, for the blood was scarcely dry on it. Also the man appeared to be drunk, for as he clutched his arm he swayed.</p>
			<p>“Maister Gedd,” came a hoarse whisper, “Maister Gedd! Haud on, for God’s sake! Ye ken me? Ye saw me at Charcillo? Hamilton’s my name. I was wi’ Sir Erchibald. Ye ken Sir Erchibald?⁠ ⁠…” The scarecrow tottered, and would have fallen had he not leaned heavily against the wall.</p>
			<p>Recognition broke in on Don Alejandro’s mind. He remembered the square Scots soldier who had been with Lady Roylance in her escape from the Tronos del Rey and who had been Archie’s special henchman at Charcillo. He had heard that he had been in Olifa before the city surrendered. Don Alejandro was a man of action. There was a small café at hand in a retired side-street, and thither he led him. He compelled him to drink a claret glass of liqueur brandy. Obviously there was some story worth hearing. He was just about to begin a leisurely cross-examination, when the soldier seemed to recover his dazed wits and forestalled him.</p>
			<p>“What am I sittin’ here for?” he exclaimed. “Come on, sir,” and he struggled to rise. “We maun get haud o’ Sir Erchibald or Maister Lewis. There’s awfu’ things gaun to happen afore the nicht’s oot. It’s Veiro⁠ ⁠… the twa leddies⁠ ⁠… and him they ca’ the Gobernador.⁠ ⁠… Oh, sir, let’s oot o’ this and awa’ up to Heidquarters. They’ll let me in if you’re wi’ me. I’ve been tryin’ to win in my lane for the last hour, and the sentries just shoo’d me awa’.”</p>
			<p>His earnestness and alarm communicated themselves to Don Alejandro. Then the man seemed to recover his balance, and, leaning forward, clutched Don Alejandro’s knee.</p>
			<p>“I’ve been in this toun a’ week. The folks think I’m a native frae some landward bit.⁠ ⁠… I’ve been bidin’ doun near the harbour⁠—it’s an auld haunt o’ mine.⁠ ⁠… Some o’ thae Bodyguard blagyirds is there, and I got chief wi’ ane o’ them.⁠ ⁠… Syne Judson appeared⁠—ye mind him? and he kenned me, and there was a wee bit o’ a turn-up. I had to rin for my life, but I had fund oot what they were ettlin’, and I’ve been jinkin’ about the closes and tryin’ to see Sir Erchibald.⁠ ⁠… This verra nicht.⁠ ⁠… Man, they’re clever. When we’re a’ crackin’ about the grand victory and thinkin’ that there’s nae mair fecht left in the ither side, they’re plannin’ a bloody revenge.⁠ ⁠… Wha’s in it? Judson, for ane, an’ yon lang, black-avised lad they ca’ Laschallas, and some o’ the white-faced gentry that used to manage the Gran Seco.⁠ ⁠… What do they ettle? It canna be ransom, for there’s nae hidy-hole they could carry their prisoners to. It maun be murder⁠—black murder. Oh, haste ye, sir. The blagyirds or now will be well on the road to Veiro. They’ve gotten cars, and they’ll no be easy stoppit.⁠ ⁠… What’s the time? Gettin’ on for eight?” The man staggered to his feet with wild eyes.</p>
			<p>“Is there no an aeroplane?” he cried. “We maun gang by air, for they’ll beat us by the road.”</p>
			<p>But when a quarter of an hour later Archie and Blenkiron were roused by the news into violent activity, it was found that there were no aeroplanes to be had in or near the city of Olifa. Also it was discovered that the wires between Olifa and Veiro had been tampered with. It was impossible to communicate even with Alcorta Junction.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
