<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Epilogue</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="epilogue" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Epilogue</h2>
			<p>The Courts of the Morning had recovered the peace which till a year ago had been theirs since the beginning of time. Where had once been the busy depot was now only shaggy downland, and a few blackened timbers, over which Nature had begun to spin her web. Choharua looked down again upon meadow and forest as free from human turmoil as the blue spaces of ocean beyond. Only at the head of the seaward gully were there signs of life. A small group of tents had been set up, almost on the spot where Barbara and the Gobernador had first looked down the four thousand feet of green dusk to the land-locked bay. The ruins of the power-house and the chute were already masked with creepers and tall grasses, and only certain scars on the hillside, not made by the winter rains, told that there man had once wrought and striven.</p>
			<p>The day was passing from the steady glare of afternoon to the light airs which precede twilight. The sun was nearing a broad belt of amethyst haze which lay on the western horizon, and the face of Choharua was beginning to break up into shadows. The party who occupied the tents had come there by sea, and made their way up the rugged steps of the ravine to the plateau. The reason of their journey was apparent, for between the ravine and the mountain, on a mound which rose like a sentinel above the meadows, could be seen a tall wooden cross. Presently that would be replaced by a stone memorial, to mark the resting-place of him who had been the Gobernador of the Gran Seco.</p>
			<p>There was the smoke of a destroyer far below in the gulf. That very day it had brought to this eyrie the new President-elect of the Republic of Olifa. The said President-elect was sitting beside Sandy on the very edge of the ravine, so that he looked down fifty feet of red rock to the tops of tall trees. He was amusing himself with dropping his cigarette ash into the gulf.</p>
			<p>“If I slipped off this perch I should certainly break my neck,” he observed. “That has been the position of all of us for so long that we have got used to it. I wonder when I shall feel accustomed to being secure?”</p>
			<p>Sandy asked about the condition of Olifa.</p>
			<p>“It is a marvel. We are a stable people after all, and, having gone a little off the lines, we have now jolted back to the track and are quite content with it.⁠ ⁠… The elections went as pleasantly as a festa.⁠ ⁠… Lossberg is content, for he has Bianca’s place, and the army reductions will be made slowly and discreetly. There is a vast amount to be done, but bit by bit we shall re-make the machine. I shall have Blenkiron to assist me, praise be to God. Him I have left wallowing in business, while I made the trip here to see you. <i>You</i>, my dear Sandy. For some months the destiny of Olifa has depended on you. I want that to continue.”</p>
			<p>Sandy did not speak. His eyes were on the downs which ran southward along the scarp, where far off he thought he saw two figures.</p>
			<p>“I have come to offer you the post of Gobernador of the Gran Seco,” Luis continued briskly. “In effect, as you know well, it will be an independent province. Its problems are not those of Olifa. It cannot be an integral part of the republic. It is tributary, yes⁠—but not dependent. He who governs it must be a strong man and a wise man. And it is of the first importance, for on it rest the wealth and peace of Olifa.”</p>
			<p>“It is a great charge,” said Sandy, but his eyes were still on the distant figures.</p>
			<p>“You are already a king among the Indian pueblas. You are a king among the mine-workers. You will have Blenkiron as your lieutenant to direct the industry. We will build you a palace, and up here in the Courts of the Morning you will have your country estate. It is a good watchtower, señor. Here you will be able to think high thoughts.”</p>
			<p>He laid his hand on the other’s arm.</p>
			<p>“Consider! Are you the man to go home to Europe and sit down in cities? Will you dabble in your politics, like Sir Archie? I do not think so. You would be restless in an old country where things move slowly and everything is done by long speeches.⁠ ⁠… You are a landowner, are you not? Will you settle down upon your acres, and shoot little birds, and entertain your friends, and in time grow fat? I know the life a little, for I have seen it, and it is pleasant⁠—oh yes. But is it the life for you?”</p>
			<p>Luis’s air suddenly became very grave.</p>
			<p>“You are my friend, and I love you more than a brother. Therefore I want you to stay with me. But you are also a great man, and I am jealous that your greatness shall not be wasted. You are a creator, and you cannot escape your destiny. The era of the Old World is over, and it is the turn of the New World to-day. I have often heard you say that the difficulties even of Europe must be settled in the West. Listen to me, señor. The time will come when the problems of the West will be settled between the United States and Olifa. Yes, Olifa. We have wealth, we have won stability, presently we shall have leadership. I cannot do the leading. I can only, as you say, ‘carry on.’ Castor would have done it if he had lived. Now his mantle awaits you. You will have work worthy of a man, work which will need all your powers of mind and will and body. You will make a name that will live for ever. Will you choose to be a sleepy squire when you might be a king? You are not a provincial, you are not a native of any land. Your country is that which you can make for yourself.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>Sandy shook his head. “I don’t think you understand.”</p>
			<p>“But indeed I understand. I understand <i>you</i>. I have studied you with admiration, and, what is more, with love. I know you better than you know yourself.” He smiled. “I said that you could be a king, and I did not speak altogether in metaphor. Forms of government are not eternal things. Olifa is a republic, because republics were in fashion when she began. But some day she may well be a kingdom.⁠ ⁠… Do not laugh. I do not mean any foolish dictatorship. We are a free people. But Olifa demands a leader, and whoever the leader is whom she follows he will be her king.”</p>
			<p>Luis rose. “Think well over what I have said. I now go to stretch my legs before dinner. Within a day or two I must have your answer.”</p>
			<p>Sandy remained alone on the pinnacle of rock. The sun was now close to the horizon and the west was like a great flower in blossom. The face of Choharua was rose-red, and the levels below were all purple, a deeper tint than the amethyst of the sea.</p>
			<p>Out of the circumambient glory Janet appeared, hatless, her hair like an aureole.</p>
			<p>“I left Barbara a mile behind,” she said. “She wanted to see Geordie Hamilton about one of the vaqueros who is sick. You look pensive, Sandy. A penny for your thoughts.”</p>
			<p>“I have been talking to Luis.⁠ ⁠… He has just offered me the governorship of the Gran Seco, with apparently the reversion of a kingdom.”</p>
			<p>“Well?” she asked. She was picking a flower to pieces to hide trembling hands.</p>
			<p>“What do you think, Janet? You are the wisest woman in the world. Shall Ulysses settle down in Phæacia and forget all about Ithaca?”</p>
			<p>“That is for Ulysses to say.”</p>
			<p>“But Ulysses has no ambition left. He never had much, and what little he had is buried up there.”</p>
			<p>The eyes of both turned eastward to the slim cross on the high ground above the meadows, now dyed blood-red by the setting sun. Against the background of the mountain it stood out like a great calvary.</p>
			<p>“I think we saved his soul,” he said gravely, “but we also brought him to his death. The glory of the world does not seem to amount to much when it all ends in six feet of earth. And the things that matter more than glory! I can’t feel up to them, Janet. I am a very ordinary sort of fellow who shirks responsibility. I am no Castor. I can take a hand in king-making, but a king-maker is never a king.”</p>
			<p>“Other people think differently, Sandy dear,” Janet said softly. “I have had one great moment in my life that I can never forget⁠—when the Army of the Revolution entered Olifa. You remember, Olifa had got back her old assurance. The Avenida was like a river of white light between two banks of roses.⁠ ⁠… People in masses on both sides, and at all the windows, and on all the house-tops, and everywhere flowers.⁠ ⁠… The Olifa regulars as smart as Aldershot, and the new President in his carriage, and the new ministers.⁠ ⁠… And then, after all the splendour, the lean, dusty fighting men! I cried like a baby when I saw Archie⁠—horribly embarrassed he was, poor darling, not knowing what to do with the flowers that fell on his head and his saddle⁠—rather like a schoolboy being kissed by his mother after a famous innings.⁠ ⁠… But when you came, I stopped crying and my heart stood still. You remember? All the shouting and the flower-scattering seemed to stop when you appeared at the head of your battered commandos. There was a great hush, and for a moment that vast multitude seemed to catch its breath. It was because they saw the man who might be their king.⁠ ⁠… You never moved your head, Sandy, and you stared straight before you as if you were asleep. What were you thinking of?”</p>
			<p>“I was thinking of Castor, and longing for him to be alive.”</p>
			<p>“Only that? Had Ulysses no thought of the vacant throne of Phæacia⁠—of carrying on a dead man’s work?”</p>
			<p>“No, by Heaven, he cannot.⁠ ⁠… He couldn’t if he wanted to, but he doesn’t want to, for his heart isn’t in it.⁠ ⁠… I’m an alien here and I’m sick of being an alien.⁠ ⁠… I’m not Castor. I haven’t his ambition, I haven’t his brains, I don’t want to be on a pedestal. Perhaps I’m tired, perhaps I’m getting old, but I want my own people. I’ve seen Luis and his gallant lads on fire about this country and planning what a great land it is going to be, and it made me sick for my own.⁠ ⁠… Castor too.⁠ ⁠… He had never known a fatherland before, but he found one here.⁠ ⁠… I’ve got the best in the world, and I’m homesick for it. These last months I’ve been living with half my mind on my work and half on all kinds of small, ridiculous, homely things. You would laugh if you knew the kind of picture I’ve had in my head whenever I wasn’t engaged on some urgent job.⁠ ⁠… How good the beer at Tap used to taste in a pewter mug⁠ ⁠… the scent of the hay in the Oxford meadows⁠ ⁠… bacon and eggs for tea after hunting⁠ ⁠… the moorburn and the peat reek in April⁠ ⁠… the beloved old musty smell of the library at Laverlaw and logs crackling on a December evening.⁠ ⁠… I’m sick with longing for my own Border hills.⁠ ⁠… It’s no good, Janet. You can’t cut adrift from the bands that God has tied. I’ve had enough of Abana and Pharpar, rivers of Damascus. I’m for the modest little clear streams of Israel.”</p>
			<p>Janet dropped her flower and looked up smiling.</p>
			<p>“You are lonely, Sandy.”</p>
			<p>“I am lonely. That is why I want to get back to companionable things.”</p>
			<p>A sudden happiness came into the girl’s face. She looked away from him and spoke rapidly.</p>
			<p>“Barbara once went over to Laverlaw with the Manorwaters. Do you remember? You pretended that she annoyed you.⁠ ⁠… I wonder.⁠ ⁠… Less than a year ago we spoke of her in the Regina Hotel. You pretended you couldn’t remember her name.⁠ ⁠… I wonder again.⁠ ⁠… Oh, Sandy, you are an old fool.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>He scrambled off his perch and stood above her. He was flushed under his deep sunburn.</p>
			<p>“Janet, you witch! How did you guess?”</p>
			<p>“It wasn’t very hard. When a man like you grows tired of wandering and has a sudden longing for home, it is because he is in love with a woman and wants to take her to the place where he belongs.”</p>
			<p>“You’ve guessed right. I suppose it has been coming on for a long time, but I didn’t know it⁠—not till that awful night at Veiro. When we rode up and I found her in the midst of plunging horses⁠—with her shoes all cut to bits and her ankle twisted, and dropping with fatigue, and yet as brave as a lion⁠—and when I saw the roses on her breast all crushed and torn with her wild scramble⁠—I think I knew. And later, when Archie arrived and his first cry was for you, I remembered that I had nobody to feel like that about⁠ ⁠… and I wanted someone⁠—her⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>He stopped, for he felt that words were needless in view of a depth of comprehension in Janet’s crooked smile.</p>
			<p>“I haven’t a chance, I know,” he stammered.</p>
			<p>“Not a ghost of a chance,” she said briskly, “but you can always ask her. She’ll be here in about five minutes. I’m going for a walk to look for Luis and the others. We shan’t be back for hours and hours.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
